---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: 'This article describes the crime policy of the Democratic Party. '
keywords: |
    crime policy, democratic party, crime, democrats, law and order,
    urbanization, industrialization, anticrime legislation, antiterrorism
    laws
title: Crime Policy of the Democratic Party
---


<i class="fa fa-plug"></i> This essay appears in The Encyclopedia of the American Democratic and
Republican Parties, published by the International Encyclopedia Society. The encyclopedia won the Choice Outstanding Academic Book Award in
1997. <i class="fa fa-trophy" aria-hidden="true"></i> 



1 Policy Goes Federal
=========================



Until the dawn of the 20th century and the social problems that
accompanied urbanization and industrialization, crime policy was often
viewed as properly belonging to state and local authorities. The U.S.
Constitution, combined with a tradition of federalism, reserved police
powers for the states, and both the federal and state governments were
satisfied to keep it that way, at least until the 20th century. Before
the 1900s, most of the federal government's forays into crime policy
involved regulating interstate commerce and the railroads, protecting
the mails, combatting counterfeiting, and conducting such moral purity
crusades as those against pornography and lotteries. With the Sherman
Antitrust Act in the late 1800s, Congress struck out against monopolies.





After the turn of the century, Congress increasingly turned to passing
legislation to solve a growing crime problem. And while many Democrats
played important roles in moving anticrime legislation through Congress,
several stand out as key players as the war against crime unfolded.
Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt launched a war on crime as
part of his New Deal. During Roosevelt's administration, Democratic
Representative Hatton W. Sumners of Texas, the chairman of the House
Judiciary Committee, helped guide anticrime legislation through
Congress. In subsequent years, conservative Southern Democrats often led
the fight in Congress against crime. For instance, during the 1950s and
1960s, Senator John L. McClellan, a conservative Democrat from Arkansas,
led a committee that produced several landmark pieces of anticrime
legislation. In the mid 1990s, Democratic President Bill Clinton fought
to bolster federal antiterrorism laws in the wake of bombings at the
World Trade Center and Oklahoma City Federal Building.





Many of the battles among Democrats over anticrime legislation took
place not so much over the need for the acts but over to whom -- state
governments or local authorities -- federal funds should be distributed,
battles that frequently divided the Democratic Party. Southern
Conservative Democrats have tended to favor allocating federal anticrime
funds to state governments, while their more Northern, liberal, and
urban counterparts have campaigned to give the money to city and other
local administrations. Members of the Democratic Party have also been
divided over such issues as broadening police powers and spending on
crime prevention versus repression, again with conservative Southern
Democrats taking a harder line than other elected members of the party
by favoring an expansion of search and seizure laws and a focus on
repressing crime.





In 1908, Republican President Theodore Roosevelt helped increase the
federal government's anticrime role by proposing the creation of a
Bureau of Investigation within the Department of Justice. But recalling
allegations that Roosevelt had misused the Secret Service for his
political ends and wary of the president's motives, Congress rejected
his proposal. The president reacted by establishing the bureau by
executive order.





Then, in 1910, Congress passed a piece of landmark legislation, the Mann
Act, officially the White Slave-Trade Act, prohibiting the
transportation of women across state lines for prostitution. A few years
later, Congress passed the Webb-Kenyon Act over Republican William H.
Taft's veto. The act forbid the use of interstate commerce for the
movement of liquor into dry states.





In 1914, the seeds of the drug war of the 1980s were planted as Congress
passed the Harrison Narcotics Act, which regulated professionals dealing
with narcotic drugs. Enforcement of the legislation increasingly
criminalized drug trafficking and the use of narcotics, which in turn
prompted still more legislation.





As the century moved on, crime increasingly moved into the spotlight as
a political issue, and the prohibition period brought yet more attention
to it. During the presidential election of 1928, prohibition was a major
point of contention between Democratic candidate Alfred E. Smith and the
Republican nominee, Herbert Hoover, who went on to win the election and
to focus the nation's attention further on crime.





As part of his New Deal, Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt's
went on to expand Hoover's drive against criminals into a war on crime.
The president's attorney general, Homer S. Cummings, teamed up with
Democratic Representative Hatton W. Sumners of Texas, the chairman of
the House Judiciary Committee, to push ten pieces of anticrime
legislation through Congress, with much of their enforcement
responsibilities going to the FBI.





Although organized crime had certainly existed in American before World
War I, federal legislators had generally considered the problem to be
the province of state and local authorities. But as organized crime
increasingly pervaded the national consciousness, Congress began to
react -- first with anti racketeering statues enacted in 1934 and 1946
and later with the proceedings of the Senate Special Committee to
Investigate Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce, otherwise known as
the Kefauver Crime Committee after its chairman, Estes Kefauver, a
Tennessee Democrat. The committee, formed in 1950, also included
Democrats Lester C. Hunt of Wyoming and Herbert R. O'Conor of Maryland.





During the second half of the 20th century, growing concern over
organized crime, drug abuse, and violent crime as well as the advent of
the civil rights movement brought a massive increase in federal
involvement in law and order issues. From 1957 through 1960, Senator
John L. McClellan, a conservative Democrat from Arkansas, ran the
hearings of the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the
Labor and Management Field that was investigating labor-management
racketeering -- meaning organized crime. The committee uncovered a close
relationship between members of the underworld and the heads of several
unions, most notably the Teamsters. The hearings eventually led Robert
F. Kennedy, Democratic President John F. Kennedy's attorney general and
the former chief counsel for the McClellan labor racketeering hearings,
to gain passage in the early 1960s of several anticrime statues aimed at
curbing the gambling activities of the underworld. Robert Kennedy also
led a drive against racketeering.





In the mid-1960s, a dramatic shift in national attitude took place:
Crime began to be viewed as a national problem warranting a national
solution. In 1964, the Democratic Party's platform, which for years had
made little mention of crime, commented that lawlessness must be
eradicated.





The 1964 presidential campaign battle among Republican Senator Barry
Goldwater, Independent candidate George Wallace, and Democrat Lyndon B.
Johnson further brought crime into the national spotlight as a policy
issue. In reaction to Civil Rights demonstrations and a rising crime
rate, both Goldwater and Wallace included a strong law and order plank
in their campaigns, with Goldwater often referring to the "crime in the
streets." Both accused Johnson of fostering a leniency that abetted
crime. In the conservative tradition, Goldwater and Wallace promised to
repress crime with a stricter enforcement of the criminal code.





Johnson responded not so much with a war on crime as a "War on Poverty,"
hoping to reduce the crime rate by ameliorating what such Democratic
liberals as Johnson saw as its root cause. Indeed, even by as early as
the 1960s, the Democrats had focused on attacking the root causes of
crime. In fact, references to such an approach appear as early as the
1940 Democratic Party platform, when the party noted its work in
clearing the slums that, it said, were breeding grounds of crime.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Fundamental Tenets of the Liberal Position
================================================



The difference between the approaches of how to resolve the crime
problem reveals the fundamental tenets of the conservative and liberal
positions. The conservative position -- including that taken by many in
a long line of Southern Democrats -- seeks to resolve crime directly
through repressing it. On the other hand, the liberal position, often
taken up by many Northern, urban members of the Democratic Party, seeks
to solve the crime problem by alleviating what they see as its source:
poverty, discrimination, and inequality. The conservative position
emphasizes individual responsibility while the liberal view centers on
social welfare. Hence Johnson's Great Society programs.





In 1967, as the next presidential election was approaching, the crime
issue remained alive, kept to the fore of public and political
consciousness by a high crime rate and continuing racial tensions. In
February, President Johnson presented a detailed message to Congress on
crime that included a landmark proposal for the enactment of the Safe
Streets and Crime Control Act of 1967, one of the biggest pieces of
federal legislation yet proposed to help combat crime. The measure
proposed to implement a large-scale program of grants to cities and
other communities to aid their fight against crime.





The president's bill, however, encountered formidable opposition in
Congress, not only from Republicans but also from Southern Democrats,
both of which groups were becoming increasingly disenchanted with
Johnson's Great Society program that, they believed, had made big
promises but had fulfilled few of them. The objection to the president's
bill, though, was not over the need for it, but over how the funds
should be allocated. Johnson's bill would distribute money to the
cities; Republicans and Southern Democrats wanted the grants delivered
to the states. In the wake of the assassinations of John F. Kennedy and
Martin Luther King Jr. and amid rioting in such cities as Newark and
Detroit, a subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee held hearings
on the bill.





Meantime, as the debate over Johnson's proposal continued into spring
1968, law and order again rose as a central point of contention in the
presidential election. Richard M. Nixon, seeking the presidency for the
Republican Party, employed the issue in his campaign, as did Wallace,
who was again running for the presidency as an Independent candidate.
Both Nixon and Wallace argued that decisive action needed to be taken
against crime -- and that action meant enforcing the criminal laws more
forcefully. The voting public, having its attention further focused on
crime by the campaign messages of Nixon and Wallace, waited to see what
Congress would do with Johnson's proposal.





Despite the lack of enthusiasm among Republicans and, perhaps more
important, conservative Southern Democrats for the administration's
bill, the House Judiciary Committee reported out a bill that, in
accordance with the president's proposal, provided direct grants to
local authorities. The committee's chairman, Democrat Emmanuel Celler,
was instrumental in guiding the bill through committee. Yet 12 of the 15
Republicans on the Judiciary Committee lobbied strongly against the bill
when it was introduced to the floor, where met strong opposition not
only from House Republicans but also from conservative Southern
Democrats. The Southern Democrats joined the Republicans in arguing that
the bill would usurp states' rights and allow the central government to
dictate the law enforcement policies of local authorities.





The Republicans counterattacked with an alternative named the Cahill
Amendment after its sponsor. It proposed distributing block grants to
state agencies rather than grants-in-aid to local authorities. Besides
House Republicans and many Southern Democrats, 47 of the 50 governors --
many of whom were members of the Democratic Party -- supported the
Cahill Amendment. On the other hand, big city majors, again including
many Democrats, backed the administration's bill. Thus, a deeper
division arose within the Democratic party over the Safe Streets and
Crime Control Act. Democratic city majors as well as liberal, Northern
Democrats in the House held fast to the administration's plan, while
state governors and Southern Democrats generally opposed it, favoring
the Republicans' alternative instead.





A fault line had also developed within Johnson's Democratic
administration. The President's Crime Commission, for one, did not
strongly support grants to local authorities. Rather, it identified lack
of coordination as among the problems of U.S. crime policy, which some
interpreted as an endorsement of the need to better include state
governments in law enforcement. Second, many other mid-level
administration officials quietly favored the Republicans' block grants
approach.





These fractures within the Democratic Party, both inside and outside the
administration, helped influence the House of Representatives to reject
the administration's bill in favor of a bill sanctioning a strong state
role.





During this period, the Senate Judiciary Committee was considering the
administration's bill. The committee's chairman, conservative Democrat
John McClellan of Arkansas, frowned upon Johnson's proposal, causing an
early party fissure in the Senate. Backed by three other Southern
Democrats on the Judiciary Committee, Democrat McClellan joined
committee Republicans to rewrite the administration's bill to emphasize
a strong state role in fighting crime. However, some of the more liberal
Senate Democrats, arguing that the revised bill was anti-city, obtained
a compromise stipulating that states had to funnel percentages of the
grants to local government units. In the end, like in the House,
Southern Democrats joined forces with Republicans to rout the
administration's bill and substitute a state-oriented version for it.





Over the objections of some liberal Democrats, President Johnson
reluctantly signed the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968 into law, saying that it contained "more good than bad." The act,
which included the establishment of the Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, was a victory for critics of the Great Society,
including some conservative Southern Democrats. The enforcement
administration survived into the 1980s, when battles over the federal
budget led to its demise. The act also included gun control provisions
initially proposed by Johnson, though they had been weakened by
Republicans during their revision of the bill. In the act, conservative
Democrat McClellan succeeded in winning expanded authority for
wiretapping without warrants, despite objections from his fellow, albeit
more liberal, Democrats, including President Johnson.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Democrats Called "Soft on Crime"
======================================



In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the administration of Republican
President Richard Nixon continued the full-on attack against crime begun
by Johnson -- but with an emphasis on law and order. Nixon's policy,
however, came under attack, largely from liberals, who saw Nixon's law
and order campaign as attempts to put down civil rights activists and
antiwar demonstrators. President Nixon, on the other hand, used the
rising public sentiment that criminals were out of control and city
streets unsafe to assail members of the Democrat Party as being "soft on
crime."





Yet during the Nixon administration, several pieces of anticrime
legislation became law, including the landmark Organized Crime Control
Act of 1970. Sponsored by Senator McClellan, the conservative Southern
Democrat from Arkansas, and Senator Samuel J. Ervin, a conservative
Democrat from North Carolina, the act included Title IX, the Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations statue, which helped launch a
concerted drive against organized crime. The statue established severe
criminal and civil penalties for using racketeering money or procedures
in authentic businesses. But it also led to numerous civil lawsuits,
which in turn prompted Congress to review the statue.





In 1970, President Nixon also helped encourage passage of the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Control Act, which reinforced narcotics
penalties. Yet the act did not stop the issue of drug abuse from
reappearing in nearly every election year thereafter; the issue
eventually culminated during the 1980s in conservative Ronald Reagan's
"war on drugs" and, later, with passage of the 1988 Anti-Drug Abuse Act,
which further increased penalties for both users and dealers,
established a cabinet-level drug czar, and set aside additional federal
funds to fight drugs.





But Nixon's criticism of the Democrats as soft on crime and his
anticrime crusade soon ended, as he found himself accused of
perpetuating criminal acts as part of the Watergate affair and several
of his high-ranking administration officials -- including Republican
Vice President Spiro Agnew and Attorney General John N. Mitchell --
convicted of crimes.





The 1980 campaign of conservative Republican presidential candidate
Ronald Reagan revived the Republican Party's law and order theme and
reinvigorated crime as a national political issue after it had flagged
slightly during the latter half of the 1970s. After being elected
president, Reagan's anticrime policies focused on repressing, rather
than preventing, crime, drawing wide-spread criticism from Democrats.
During Reagan's tenure, fighting crime translated into combatting drug
trafficking and abuse. He expanded the federal government's drug
interdiction effort while Nancy Reagan, the first lady, led a "Just Say
No" campaign that equated drug use with immorality. In 1986 Congress
passed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act, which greatly expanded Reagan's war
against trafficking and abuse. Republican President George Bush
continued Reagan's antidrug drive among his crime-fighting efforts.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Republicans Undermine Rational Policies
=============================================





During the 1990s, crime has remained a dominant political issue.
Following the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City and the
attack on the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, President Bill Clinton,
a moderate Democrat, fought for a crime bill aimed at combatting
terrorism. Clinton also sought to address the crime problem with such
crime-prevention proposals as the establishment of "drug courts" that
obtain treatment for addicts and midnight basketball leagues that give
teenagers an alternative to hanging out on city streets. The programs
have been popular with Democrats and backed by many moderate
Republicans. But not conservatives. In late 1994, conservative
Republicans, led by Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Speaker
of the House, tendered a plan to reduce crime prevention spending by \$5
billion, starting a conflict that polarized Congress. Conservatives
maintained that such spending is wasteful, while the Democrats as well
as Republican moderates argued that spending money on crime prevention
is cheaper than building prisons. Yet the ultra-conservative Gingrich
insisted that crime prevention proposals were "pork."





The Grand Old Party's anticrime proposal of 1995 included a provision
that would require violent criminals to serve 85 percent of their prison
terms. Such hardline policies as determinate sentencing advocated by
conservative Republicans have not been without their costs, however,
resulting in a U.S. prison population proportionately larger than that
of any other country.





Besides seeking to cut federal money for crime prevention, conservatives
in Congress, especially the authors of the Contract with America, sought
to alter President Clinton's "community policing" drive to emphasize
hiring more police officers and buying more crime-fighting hardware.







But the Clinton administration resisted the attacks on its crime
policies. Attorney General Janet Reno, appointed by President Clinton,
has argued forcibly for the effectiveness of community policing, adding
that it has the overwhelming support of the public. Other major points
of contention over crime policy during the mid 1990s included search and
seizure rights and, as always, the level of federal aid.





In 1995, after reports showed the overall level of crime declining
slightly for the third year in a row, President Clinton set up a
National Commission on Crime Control and Prevention and charged it with
developing a strategy for controlling and preventing crime and violence.





As the presidential election of 1997 approaches, the issue of crime --
whether it focuses on drug control, prison sentences, or prevention --
promises to remain an issue of paramount social importance that will
continue to distinguish the ideologies of the Republican Party from
those of the Democratic Party.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 Bibliography
==================




Bacon, Donald C.; Davidson, Roger H.; Keller, Morton; editors. The
Encyclopedia of the United States Congress, New York: Simon & Schuster,
1995.





Barnes, Fred. "Dopey." The New Republic, May 23, 1988.





Feeley, Malcolm M. and Sarat, Austin D. The Policy Dilemma: Federal
Crime Policy and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980.





Harris, Richard. Justice: The Crisis of Law, Order, and Freedom in
America, New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, Inc., 1970.





Porter, Kirk H. and Johnson, Donald Bruce. National Party Platforms:
1840-1964, Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1966.





Tromanhauser, Edward D. The Shaping of Crime Policy, Chicago: The Union
Institute, 1990.





Gest, Ted. "Congress and Cops." U.S. News & World Report. December 26,
1994.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

6 Related
=============



See *[The Nation](https://www.thenation.com/)* magazine for
clear-headed political commentary on current affairs and policy.





6.1 Democratic Party
------------------------



<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Crime Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-crime-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Drug Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-drug-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Education Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-education-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Free Speech Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-free-speech-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Health Care Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-health-care-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-minimum-wage-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [School Prayer Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-school-prayer-policy.html)







6.2 Republican Party
------------------------



<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Crime Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-crime-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Drug Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-drug-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Education Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-education-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Free Speech Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-free-speech-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Health Care Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-health-care-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-minimum-wage-policy.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [School Prayer Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-school-prayer-policy.html)















