---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: 'This article describes the education policy of the Democratic Party.'
keywords: |
    education policy, education, federal aid, democratic party, federal aid
    for education, board of education
title: Education Policy of the Democratic Party
---


Last updated on July 30, 2004\
This essay appears in The Encyclopedia of the American Democratic and
Republican Parties, published by the International Encyclopedia Society.
The encyclopedia won the Choice Outstanding Academic Book Award in
1997.\

Table of Contents\
**1 [Supporting Federal Aid](#section-Supporting-Federal-Aid)**\
**2 [Truman Makes Aid an Issue](#section-Truman-Makes-Aid-an-Issue)**\
**3 [Kennedy Forcefully Backs
Aid](#section-Kennedy-Forcefully-Backs-Aid)**\
**4 [Ideological Differences](#section-Ideological-Differences)**\
**5 [Clinton Takes Action](#section-Clinton-Takes-Action)**\
**6 [Bibliography](#section-Bibliography)**\
**7 [Related](#section-Related)**\
    7.1 [Democratic Party](#section-Democratic-Party)\
    7.2 [Republican Party](#section-Republican-Party)\



[]{#section-Supporting-Federal-Aid}1 Supporting Federal Aid
===========================================================


The Democratic Party, its candidates, and elected politicians have
established a consistent record of initiating and supporting federal aid
for education. Although the party began its early years by opposing
federal educational assistance, the party soon altered its position,
taking a favorable stance toward education that has endured, albeit in
changing policies, through the first half of the 1990s.



Before the party turned to supporting education, one Democrat attempted
to thwart an early piece of historic legislation. The Morrill Act,
introduced by Vermont Representative Justin Morrill in 1857 to donate
land to states and territories for colleges, was among the first
attempts to provide federal aid for education. The measure, however, was
vetoed in 1857 by Democratic President James Buchanan, who maintained
that it unconstitutionally interfered with states\' rights. Although the
objection that federal involvement in education interferes with states\'
rights has been a refrain often repeated, usually by the Republican
Party, the constitutionality of federal aid for public schooling is
considered by many to have been settled by precedence. Legally, the
argument that the federal government\'s involvement is unconstitutional
also seems to hold little validity. Indeed, even in the early years of
the battle over aid for education, the constitutionality argument failed
to persuade Congress. A resubmitted Morrill Act was passed in 1862 and
signed into law by President Abraham Lincoln.



The constitutionality issue aside, the proper role of the federal
government in public education was to increasingly become a point of
contention between Democrats and Republicans and at times among
Democrats themselves. But first the stage had to be set.



After the Civil War, President Andrew Johnson, a Democrat nominated by
the Union Party, approved a federal Department of Education in March of
1867. The department was soon demoted and renamed the Office of
Education from 1870 to 1939, when it was subsumed under the Federal
Security Agency, later the Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
Congress established the U.S. Department of Education on May 4, 1980.



In 1870 Republican President Ulysses S. Grant implored Congress to
support primary education, an entreaty that became a precursor to the
future struggles over federal aid to education. The battle lines,
however, would typically though not necessarily be drawn along partisan
lines, with Republicans opposing and Democrats favoring federal
involvement in education. During the year of Grant\'s request, the
struggle in Congress, but not yet the partisanship, began when George F.
Hoar, a Republican representative from Massachusetts, introduced a bill
to provide general aid to public schools. Although Hoar\'s bill never
came to a vote, it served to focus attention on the issue.



In 1876 the Democratic Party took a view that the party and its
candidates would repudiate after having remained nearly silent on the
issue for several election years: the platform declared that the
establishment and support of the public schools belonged exclusively to
the states. Then, as the Republican platforms of 1880, 1884, and 1888
and the Republican presidents of 1880 and 1888 endorsed national support
for education, the Democrats kept quiet. From 1880 to 1920 the
Democratic Party platforms made little mention of the subject. Grover
Cleveland, the Democratic president from 1884 to 1888 and again from
1892 to 1896, also had little to say on the matter. After the 1888
presidential election, the Republicans also dropped the issue.



The issue did not resurface significantly until 1920 \-- when the
positions of the parties had been reversed: The Democrats favored
federal aid to education while the Republicans condemned all aid except
that for vocational and agricultural training. The Democrat Party
platform called for \"co-operative federal assistance to the states\"
for the removal of illiteracy, the increase of teachers\' salaries, and
instruction in citizenship. The reversal completed the requisite
conditions for partisan conflict and, in general, established the
positions that the two parties would henceforth take.


Meanwhile, the 20th century brought social crises that manifested
themselves in bills, often proposed by Democrats, for new federal
legislation on education. The rate of selective service rejections, for
instance, prompted demands for aid in 1918, just as the rejections
during the World War II draft rekindled the debate over federal aid.
World War II also brought legislation to supplement education in
communities affected by the war effort. The teacher shortage after World
War II inspired the aid proposals of the late 1940s. The Depression of
the 1930s led to emergency aid to education. And the baby boom of the
1950s spawned school construction bills. The Cold War and the Soviet
Union\'s launching of Sputnik in 1957 helped spur the National Defense
Education Act. The civil rights demonstrations of the 1960s encouraged
legislation to help equalize educational opportunity. Yet to a degree
beyond that established by any one of these social crises, initiatives
\-- first from Congress and later from Democratic presidents \-- emerged
for general federal assistance for education, though they were not to
arise in earnest until the 1930s.



In fact, despite the Democrats\' pro-education platform of 1920, the
issue had lost much of its poignancy by 1924 among the Democratic party,
which by now merely held that the \"federal government should offer to
the states such counsel, advice, and aid as may be available through the
federal agencies for the general improvement of our schools.\" Four
years later, during the election year of 1928, the Democratic Party
reiterated the stance of 1924.



The 1930s found the Democratic Party avoiding endorsement of an expanded
education program, even though Democrats took credit for helping youth
stay in school and for the construction of school buildings with public
works funds. Other than endorsing the original Americanization bill,
Woodrow Wilson, the Democratic president from 1912 to 1920, did little
else of major significance regarding education.



Beginning with his election in 1932, President Franklin D. Roosevelt,
the first Democrat in the White House since Wilson\'s term of 1916 to
1920, renewed the failed struggle of Republican Herbert Hoover,
president from 1928 to 1932, to reduce appropriations for vocational
education in the states. Congress, however, rejected Roosevelt\'s appeal
and sought an increase, passing a measure in 1936 that expanded the
program. Roosevelt signed the bill, but he appointed a Committee on
Vocational Education to review the program. Responding to pressure from
Congress for a general federal aid bill, Roosevelt expanded the
committee\'s sphere to include all aspects of federal education policy.
In February 1938, the committee, now renamed the Advisory Committee on
Education, recommended a multimillion dollar education-assistance
program. Roosevelt, however, did not endorse the report, prompting
Congressman John J. Cochran, a Missouri Democrat, to say that \"the
president of the United States has in no way expressed himself as either
for or against the recommendations of the committee he appointed.\"



Roosevelt soon found himself hard-pressed to take a stance. To the
Thomas-Harrison bill of 1939, prepared on the basis of the Advisory
Committee\'s report and approved by the Senate\'s Education and Labor
Committee, the administration responded that the legislation did not fit
the president\'s program. Roosevelt said in speeches that he would only
accept an aid program that limited assistance to those states unable to
fulfill their own educational needs. Roosevelt continued to avoid
endorsing federal aid through 1943.



But Roosevelt\'s cool attitude toward federal aid for education did not
stop the Democratic Party from taking up the issue with renewed force in
1944, even though the Republicans included no mention of the school-aid
issue in their platform. The Democratic Party platform called for
federal aid to education administered by the states.



During his final year in office, Roosevelt extended a partial commitment
to education. He wrote in his budget message to Congress in 1945 that
selective service records expose shortcomings in elementary and
secondary education. \"If a suitable standard is to be maintained in all
parts of the country,\" Roosevelt wrote, \"the federal government must
render aid where needed\--but only where it is needed.\"


 







[]{#section-Truman-Makes-Aid-an-Issue}2 Truman Makes Aid an Issue
=================================================================


Democrat Harry S. Truman, the vice president during Roosevelt\'s final
term and his successor after Roosevelt died in April 1945, took a more
active position toward education than did Roosevelt. In fact, Truman
made aid for education one of his campaign issues in 1948. And Truman\'s
first budget called for legislation to supplement the resources of the
states to help them equalize educational opportunities and achieve
satisfactory standards. Subsequent Truman budgets also set aside money
for education.



While Truman turned aid to education into a campaign issue in 1948, the
Democratic Party repeated its 1944 call for federal aid \-- this time
with a direct attack on the Republicans: \"We vigorously support the
authorization, which was so shockingly ignored by the Republican 80th
Congress, for the appropriation of \$300 million as a beginning of
federal aid to the states to assist them in meeting the present
educational needs.\" The challenge was a precursor to the partisan
conflicts over education that surfaced during the next presidential
election year. For the time being, however, the Republicans generally
avoided the issue.



By the election of 1952, the education-aid issue had moved further into
the spotlight, and the Democratic and Republican parties took sharply
contrasting positions. The Democratic Party refined its position of the
previous elections by outlining school construction, teachers\'
salaries, and school maintenance and repair as the specific purposes for
which federal support should be allocated. The Republican Party\'s
platform maintained that the responsibility for sustaining popular
education rests with local communities and the states.



But by 1956 the two parties were again backing away from their
differences. The Republican administration had proposed a school
construction program, and it was now supported by the Republican Party.
Meanwhile, the Democrats, taking a position not largely different from
the Republicans\', endorsed legislation to help states and local
communities build schools, to educate migratory workers, to set up
programs for gifted children, and to train teachers in technical and
scientific fields.



In 1958, the National Defense Education Act was approved by Congress at
the urging of Republican President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Even though the
act was advocated by a Republican president and sanctioned by bipartisan
support in Congress, its passage signaled an expanded role for the
federal government in education, prompted in part by concerns over the
country\'s national defense and rate of scientific advancement, which
had arisen after the Soviets\' launched *Sputnik* the previous year and
in response to the Cold War in general. The measure supported science,
math, and foreign language programs in public schools.



With the election of 1960, however, partisan controversy returned.
Although the platforms of both parties supported federal aid in
principle in 1960, the kind of support the two parties had in mind was
radically different. The Democrats called for generous financial support
for, among other educational programs, teachers\' salaries and
construction of classrooms and other facilities, spurring the
Republicans to counter that aid for teachers\' salaries could lead only
to federal domination and control of schools. The Republicans supported
only limited assistance for school construction. The contrast between
the two parties\' policies blossomed into a major domestic issue of the
presidential campaign \-- a campaign that also compelled the two parties
in Congress to solidify their positions.



Senator John F. Kennedy, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1960,
seized upon federal support for schools and attempted to make it a major
issue in the election. He blasted President Eisenhower for giving only
limited support to the issue and attacked the Republican candidate for
president, Vice President Richard M. Nixon, for backing only a limited
construction program and for referring to federal aid for education as
\"too extreme.\"


 






[]{#section-Kennedy-Forcefully-Backs-Aid}3 Kennedy Forcefully Backs Aid
=======================================================================


Kennedy is often regarded as being the first president to make federal
aid to education a major component of his domestic program and to back
it forcefully. After taking office in the White House, Kennedy handed
Congress a proposal in 1961 asking for a three-year, \$2.3 billion
aid-to-education program. As embodied in Oregon Senator Wayne E.
Morse\'s School Assistance Act of 1961, the bill sought, among other
initiatives, to provide increases for teacher salaries, assistance in
constructing classrooms, and aid to children in depressed areas. Though
passed by the Senate and approved by the House Education and Labor
Committee, the School Assistance Act died in the House Rules Committee.
The bill is significant, however, in demonstrating the assertive role
that Democrat Morse, then-chairman of the Subcommittee on Education,
took in advocating federal involvement in education. Senator Morse
introduced numerous bills as he fought unrelentingly to expand federal
aid to education. Unfortunately for Morse and the Democratic Party, the
School Assistance Act\'s death was hastened, in part, by the fight over
aid to parochial schools; Catholics had lobbied for such support.



Even President Kennedy, despite his crusade for school aid, stopped
short of allowing public funding for private schooling. \"There can be
no question of federal funds being used for support of private and
parochial schools. It is unconstitutional under the First Amendment as
interpreted by the Supreme Court,\" Kennedy said. In 1947 the Supreme
Court had ruled in *Everson* v. *Board of Education* that \"no tax in
any amount \... can be levied to support any religious activities or
institutions, whatever they may be called, or whatever form they may
adopt to teach or practice religion.\" Kennedy\'s comments
notwithstanding, the administration eventually weakened its stance
against aid for parochial schools in the hopes of achieving a compromise
on a major aid bill.



In 1962, Kennedy tried again, asking Congress in his State of the Union
speech to pass his aid-to-education bill, which he modified to give
priority to aid to higher education, advancement of teaching standards,
and adult literacy. Congress took little action on the bill and it
withered. Again the controversy over aid to parochial schools helped
squelch the bill.



Kennedy tried yet again in 1963 \-- a year that was to become a prolific
one for the Democrats in their campaign for federal aid to education.
Kennedy put forth an omnibus education bill called the National
Education Improvement Act of 1963. It died in the House.



Although President Kennedy failed to get an omnibus education-aid bill
through Congress, several education bills, some of which embodied parts
of Kennedy\'s proposals, did become law either during the
Kennedy-Johnson administration or in the years to come. Two major 1963
bills that became law and the Democrats who helped push them were the
following:



* The Vocational Education Act of 1963, otherwise
known as the Perkins-Morse bill after Democrat Carl Perkins, a
representative from Kentucky, and Democrat Wayne Morse, a senator from
Oregon. The act, signed by President Johnson, a Democrat, on December
18, 1963, was aimed at strengthening and expanding vocational education.



* The Higher Education Facilities Act of 1963,
also known as the Morse-Green bill after Senator Morse and
Representative Edith Green, also an Oregon Democrat. The purpose of the
act, signed by Johnson on December 16, 1963, was to help colleges
construct facilities. Green, like Morse, was a tireless and innovative
advocate for education, earning herself the title \"the mother of higher
education.\" During her 18 years on the Committee on Education and
Labor, she played major roles in much of the educational legislation
that took place in the House \-- even though she did not always agree
with or support her fellow Democrats. Also in 1963, Green, herself
formerly a school teacher, published a study called *The Federal
Government and Education* that took issue with a long-standing
Republican criticism of federal aid: That it lacked sufficient
historical precedent. Green\'s study found the precedent to be 100 years
old.


 






[]{#section-Ideological-Differences}4 Ideological Differences
=============================================================


The rift between the parties only grew during the 1964 presidential
campaign, which was characterized by vast differences in ideological
positions among the candidates and their parties. Presidential candidate
Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican from Arizona, a long-time critic of
the expanding role of the federal government, maintained that support
for education was a step toward subordinating state and local
governments to administrative divisions of the central government in
Washington. He also held that there was no educational problem requiring
federal aid. In contrast, Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson was a
strong advocate of the strengthened role of the federal government and
the strongest supporter of federal aid for education yet to occupy the
White House. Johnson\'s platform promised additional and expanded aid to
supplement those programs enacted by what had been dubbed the
\"Education Congress of 1963.\"



Johnson, after winning the election, fought to fulfill those campaign
promises. Indeed, the greatest amount of educational legislation yet
followed the election of 1964. Pushed by such Democratic members of
Congress as John Brademas of Indiana and Carl Perkins of Kentucky, both
serving on the House Education and Labor Committee, and signed into law
by President Johnson, several major pieces of educational legislation
became law.



On January 12, 1965, President Johnson called for a new federal
initiative to support elementary and secondary education. The same day,
Representative Perkins, then senior member of the House Committee on
Education and Labor, introduced a bill that embodied Johnson\'s goals.
Meantime, Senator Morse, Democrat of Oregon, proposed an identical bill
in the Senate. On April 9, Congress approved the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, doubling the federal share of
elementary and secondary education expenditures. At the act\'s core is
Title 1, renamed Chapter 1 in 1981, which assists school districts with
large numbers of low-income children. Johnson signed the act on April
11, 1965.



Another major bill enacted during the Kennedy-Johnson years is the
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, also known as the War on Poverty Bill.
Although not an education act per se, the measure, presented to Congress
by Johnson, included education among its ammunition to be used in the
war. The bill earmarked money for such programs as a Job Corps for
youth, job training and vocational rehabilitation, and basic education
for adults. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 also had a strong impact upon
education. It was passed to foster desegregation of public schools and
to ensure equal rights to students regardless of race, color, religion,
or national origin. The Higher Education Act of 1965, written and moved
through Congress by Representative Green, provided students with federal
aid. In 1966 the International Education Act, which approved grants to
colleges for international studies and research, was signed into law by
President Johnson. Representative Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., a New York
Democrat who was chairman of the House Education and Labor Committee at
the time, created a task force to steer the legislation through the
House and appointed as its chairman Representative John Brademas,
Democrat of Indiana, who was instrumental in winning passage of the
bill.



Other education-related acts, many of which were components of President
Johnson\'s War on Poverty and aimed in particular at helping children
from low-income families, included Project Head Start, the Job Corps,
the Neighborhood Youth Corps, and Upward Bound.



Many in the Democratic Party \-- including Presidents Kennedy, Johnson,
and Carter and Rep. Brademas \-- also fought to establish research
foundations. For example, although it was Republican President Richard
M. Nixon who urged the establishment of a National Institute of
Education in a speech to Congress in 1970, it was Rep. Brademas who
introduced the bill, which became law in 1972.



Besides Nixon\'s call for the institute, the Nixon administration
initiated few other proposals to help education. As a result, Congress,
especially certain of its Democratic members, took an increasingly
active role in proposing educational legislation. For instance,
Democratic Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, chairman since 1969
of the Education Subcommittee of the Labor and Public Welfare Committee,
worked to develop a direct form of financial assistance to college
students. Pell\'s grants for needy undergraduate students eventually
became law.



The years 1973 and 1974 saw legislators from large, industrial states
pitted against those from smaller, rural ones over the allocation
formulas of Title 1 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
Representative Brademas\'s compromise formula became law in 1973.



Another measure of note during the 1970s is the Middle Income Student
Assistance Act of 1978, which sought to aid middle-class students who
needed assistance in paying for college. The measure was proposed in
response to a tuition tax-credit bill. According to Representative John
Brademas, he and Democratic Congressman William D. Ford of Michigan,
both of whom were on the Education and Labor Committee, told Joseph A.
Califano, Jr., the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare in the
Carter administration, that an alternative to the tax credit was needed.
Their initiative helped induce President Jimmy Carter, himself a
Democrat, to propose in 1978 a Middle Income Student Assistance bill,
which became law. The measure, however, only postponed additional calls
for a tuition-tax credit, made by Republican President George Bush.



The 12 years following the Carter administration were dominated by
Republican Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush. Former Democratic
Representative Brademas has written that Reagan administration \"has
been more hostile to education than any other administration in the
nation\'s history.\" It reduced or attempted to reduce many federal
education programs, from Chapter 1 to student aid.


[]{#section-Clinton-Takes-Action}5 Clinton Takes Action
=======================================================

President Bill Clinton, the first Democrat in the White House since
Carter, has taken decisive action to support education. After taking
office, he signed the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which passed
Congress with strong bipartisan support. The act seeks to improve
teaching and learning by providing a national framework for educational
reform. More recently, Clinton signed into the law the Improving
America\'s Schools Act of 1994, which extends for five years the
authorizations of appropriations for the programs under the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1965. President Clinton has also fought,
often with the threat of vetoes, to keep a Republican-controlled
Congress from slashing funds for various education programs. In
addition, the Clinton administration has chosen education as a battle
ground in its budget battles with Congress.



Democratic Party members in Congress have also taken action against the
Republican\'s Contract With America, which seeks to cut funding from
such social programs as education and job training. Senator Edward
Kennedy, a Massachusetts Democrat on the Labor and Human Relations
Committee, has attempted to shield education from budget cuts. Senator
Paul Simon, an Illinois Democrat, and Senator Barbara Mikulski, a
Maryland Democrat, have fought against Republican-proposed cuts to the
Americorps program, which provides thousands of students with a way to
earn money for education.



As the presidential election of 1996 approaches, the issue has surfaced
over whether parents should be provided with school vouchers to send
their children to private, public or religious schools. Clinton says
that while he backs public school choice and charter schools, he does
not support using public funds to pay for private schools.



[]{#section-Bibliography}6 Bibliography
=======================================


Brademas, John with Brown, Lynne P. The Politics of Education: Conflict
and Consensus on Capital Hill, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
1987.



Meranto, Philip. The Politics of Federal Aid to Education in 1965: A
Study in Political Innovation, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press,
1967.



Mitchell, Douglas E. and Goertz, Margaret E., editors, Education
Politics for the New Century, Bristol, PA: The Falmer Press, Taylor &
Francis, Inc., 1990.



Munger, Frank J. and Fenno, Richard F., Jr. National Politics and
Federal Aid to Education, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1962.



Spring, Joel. Conflicts of Interest: The Politics of American Education,
White Plains, NY: Longman, 1988.



Tiedt, Sidney, W. The Role of the Federal Government in Education, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1966.



Wirt, Frederick M. and Kirst, Michael W. The Political Web of American
Schools, Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1972.


 




[]{#section-Related}7 Related
=============================


[]{#TheNation}See *[The Nation](https://www.thenation.com/)* magazine for
clear-headed political commentary on current affairs and policy.



[]{#section-Democratic-Party}7.1 Democratic Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-school-prayer-policy.html)




[]{#section-Republican-Party}7.2 Republican Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-school-prayer-policy.html)



 


