---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    This article describes the freedom of speech policy of the Republican
    Party.
keywords: |
    free speech, freedom of speech, free speech policy, freedom of speech
    policy, republican party, democratic party, democrats, republicans, free
    speech legislation, media law, freedom of expression, First Amendment
title: Free Speech Policy of the Republican Party
---

Last updated on July 29, 2004\
This essay appears in The Encyclopedia of the American Democratic and
Republican Parties, published by the International Encyclopedia Society.
The encyclopedia won the Choice Outstanding Academic Book Award in
1997.\


1 Conservatives Use \"Morality\" as Ruse to Limit Speech
========================================================


Converative Republicans have traditionally been the politicians most
likely to spurn wide-scale freedom of speech, usually invoking morality
as the basis for its position. Moderative Republicans have also been
party to some legislation that sought to limit speech or expression, but
their arguments have been less likely to appeal to morality as a
justification. Yet in the early days of the Republican Party, the
Jeffersonian Republicans included freedom of speech in its campaign
platform \-- and won, in part, on the plank.


The history of free speech in the United States begins with the Alien
and Sedition Acts of 1798, which included sections that made it illegal
to utter or publish any \"false, scandelous, and malicious writing\"
against the U.S. government or writing that defamed or brought disrepute
to Congress or the president. At the time, the act fueled partisan
politics, with the Republicans using it over the Federalists. In 1880,
the principle that the First Amendment denied government the right to
control speech became a cornerstone of the Jeffersonian Republican
platform, helping Thomas Jefferson win the presidency and his fellow
Republicans control of Congress. As the Republicans promised during the
election campaign, they allowed the acts of 1798 to expire in 1801.







In the Republican Party\'s platform of 1872, freedom of speech arose
again as a political issue, but by this time the party\'s position had
shifted to more conservative inclination \-- with a view that
foreshadowed the anti-liberty policies that would be advocated during
the first half of the next century. The platform stated that Congress
and Republican President Ulysses S. Grant have fulfilled their duty in
suppressing \"treasonable organizations.\" Yet in the same platform, the
party also wrote that it \"proposes to respect the rights reserved by
the people to themselves\" and \"disapproves of the resort to
unconstitutional laws for the purpuse of removing evils.\" By 1892, the
Republican Party had amended its position to a more consistent
declaration for liberty of speech and press.



2 Government Repression
=========================================================


The World War I era was marked by government repression, \'witch
hunting,\' and violations of personal liberties. The policies of
Republicans contributed to these violations. The Congress of 1919 and
1920 introduced more than 70 measures aimed at restricting, among other
activities, peacetime sedition, the display of the red flag, and the
sending of seditious material in the mail. Among the most flagrant
attempts to restrict speech was the Sedition Bill of 1918, an amendment
to the wartime espionage act. Introduced into the Senate by Republican
Knute Nelson of Minnesota at the urging of U.S. Attorney General A.
Mitchell Palmer, the bill defined as punishable sedition any activity
aimed at changing the government or the laws of the United States.
Endorsed by President Wilson, the act became law.



On January 2, 1920, the Department of Justice, under the direction of
Attorney General Palmer carried out the so-called Palmer raids \--
perhaps the most repressive actions of the \"red scare\" period. More
than 4,000 people labeled as communists or associated with the communist
labor parties were arrested in 33 cities. Palmer said they were plagued
with a \"disease of evil thinking.\" The prosecution of those who
publicly advocated communism continued during the 1930s, when
Representative Hamilton Fish of New York, a reactionary Republican,
called for a House investigation of communists\' activities and urged
formation of a committee to hear testimony.



Communication technology that emerged during the 20th century often
stimulated restrictive legislation \-- and partisan conflict. In
particular, interparty confrontation arose following the Radio Act of
1927, which established the Radio Commission. Passed at the suggestion
of Republican Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover, who had been
appointed by Republican President Warren G. Harding, the measure
required broadcasters to act in the \"public interests\"\--a phrase that
allowed a Republican-appointed commission to evaluate program content
when considering the renewal of stations\' licenses. In 1931, the
committee rejected the Chicago Federation of Labor\'s renewal
application based on the station\'s programming content, triggering a
battle between Republicans and Democrats that culminated in the
Communications Act in 1934, which New Deal Democrats used to rewrite the
Radio Act and establish a Federal Communications Commission, or FCC.
After seeing how newspapers had in general supported Republcans, the New
Deal Democrats wanted to ensure that radio and television would be
nonpartisan. The act strenghtened the provisions of the law applying
equal time for candidates and ballot measures. But it was not until 1949
that the FCC promulgated the Fairness Doctrine, which required the
presentation of contrasting viewpoints on controversial issues of pulbic
consequence.



By 1940, however, the Republican Party had moderated its position; its
platform stood behind licensing without censorship or arbitrary
controls. And in 1944, the party\'s platform urged a clarification of
the FCC\'s role. Yet, partisan conflict over the act did not end in the
1940s. Five decades later, the FCC repealed the Fairness Doctrine under
pressure from Conservative Republican President Ronald Reagan.




3 Communist Hysteria
===================================================






The split within the Republican Party of greatest historical
significance came during the now infamous communist histeria years of
Republican Joseph McCarthy, elected by Wisconsin to the U.S. Senate in
1946. McCarthy believed the federal government to be threatened by
communist infiltration\--a contention that appealed mostly to
conservative Republicans, who saw McCarthy and his anti-communist
hysterics as a partisan political asset. In fact, during the
Congressional elections of 1950, McCarthy was the \"most frequently
invited speaker by senators seeking reelection.\" Thus it was no
surprise that McCarthy\'s anti-communist fever was catching. The
Republican Party platform of 1952 included a vehement attack on
communists.



On Feb. 9, 1950, Senator McCarthy alleged that there were 205 communists
in the State Department, igniting a national debate on the issue and
prompting Democratic Senate Majority Leader Scott Lucas of Illinois to
ask the Foreign Relantions Committee to investigate the allegations. The
investigating committee found McCarthy\'s alllegations to be \"a fraud
and a hoax perpetuated on the Senate of the United States and the
American people.\" Meantime, President Dwight D. Eisenhower, himself a
Republican, spoke out against McCarthy, but failed to reel him in.
Eisenhower has been criticized for not keeping Republican leaders,
especially conservatives, from treating McCarthy as an asset.







On Dec. 2, 1954, the Senate censured McCarthy in a 67-22 vote, with all
Democrats and 22 Republicans voting against him. Amid the anti-communist
sentiment of 1948, the House Un-American Activities Committee, chaired
by Republican Richard Nixon, held hearings that led to compromising
Albert Hiss, a top State Department official, as being part of a
communist cell. More recently, freedom of speech has become an issue in
funding for the arts through the National Endowment for the Arts.
Republican Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina introduced legislation
to prohibit the National Endowment for the Arts from funding, among
other restrictions, any \"indecent\" and \"obscene\" art. Although
Congress rejected Helms\'s proposal, it did adopt, for the first time in
the NEA\'s history, a restriction that barred funding for material
determined by the NEA to be obscene.



The advent of wide-ranging public access to the Internet has also
prompted calls for restrictive legislation. The Exon-Coats Amendment
would outlaw making \"indecent communication\" available to Internet
users younger than 18. It was drafted by Senators Jim Exon, a Nebraska
Democrat, and Daniel R. Coats, an Indiana Republican.


4 Related
=============================


See [The Nation](https://www.thenation.com/) magazine for
clear-headed political commentary on current affairs and policy.


4.1 Republican Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-school-prayer-policy.html)


4.2 Democratic Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-school-prayer-policy.html)


