---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: 'This article describes the crime policy of the Republican Party.'
keywords: |
    crime policy, republican party, democratic party, crime, democrats, law
    and order, urbanization, industrialization, anticrime legislation,
    antiterrorism laws
title: Crime Policy of the Republican Party
---


Last updated on July 28, 2004\
This essay appears in The Encyclopedia of the American Democratic and
Republican Parties, published by the International Encyclopedia Society.
The encyclopedia won the Choice Outstanding Academic Book Award in
1997.\


1 Crime Comes to the Fore
=============================================================


Until the dawn of the 20th century and the social problems that
accompanied urbanization and industrialization, crime policy was often
viewed as properly belonging to state and local authorities. The U.S.
Constitution, combined with tradition of federalism, reserved police
powers for the states, and both the federal and state governments were
satisfied to keep it that way. Before the 1900s, most of the federal
government\'s forays into crime policy involved regulating interstate
commerce and the railroads, protecting the mails, combatting
counterfeiting, and conducting such moral purity crusades as those
against pornography and lotteries. With the Sherman Antitrust Act in the
late 1800s, Congress struck out against monopolies.



The 1920s, however, first propelled crime to an issue of national
political status. The 1930s followed with a dramatic war on crime,
prompted by a series of brazen kidnappings and bank robberies. Since
then, crime policy has emerged episodically as a national political
issue, often in response to a rising crime rate, inner-city strife, or
other social situations, such as the Civil Rights and anti-war
demonstrations of the 1960s. Crime became an important political issue
of the 1960s, taking the public spotlight in, for instance, the election
of 1964. Before the \'60s, little federal money was allocated for crime
control. Yet the 1960s were not the first years in U.S. history during
which crime arose as a major political issue. The 1920s saw crime rise
to the fore, as did the 1980s and 1990s. The issue continues to be one
of importance, with Republican candidates for public office often
attempting to outdo one another with law and order rhetoric.



Since the rise of the federal government\'s involvement in crime, the
typical Republican position has been to advocate a strong law and order
response to social and criminal unrest, focusing on repressing it
through such policies as bolstering law enforcement and lengthening
prison sentences. In 1908, Republican President Theodore Roosevelt
helped increase the federal government\'s anticrime role by proposing
the creation of a Bureau of Investigation within the Department of
Justice. But recalling allegations that Roosevelt had misused the Secret
Service for his political ends and wary of the president\'s motives,
Congress rejected his proposal. The president reacted by establishing
the bureau by executive order. Meantime, the Republican Party platform
of 1908 lauded President Theodore Roosevelt for his \"brave and
impartial enforcement of the law.\"



In 1910, Congress passed a piece of landmark legislation, the Mann Act,
officially the White Slave-Trade Act, prohibiting the transportation of
women across state lines for prostitution. A few years later, Congress
passed the Webb-Kenyon Act over Republican William H. Taft\'s veto. The
act forbid the use of interstate commerce for the movement of liquor
into dry states. And in 1914, the seeds of the drug war of the 1980s
were planted as Congress passed the landmark Harrison Narcotics Act,
which regulated professionals dealing with narcotic drugs. Enforcement
of the legislation increasingly criminalized drug trafficking and the
use of narcotics, which in turn prompted still more legislation.



As the century moved on, crime increasingly moved into the spotlight as
a political issue, and the prohibition period brought yet more attention
to it. In 1928, the Republican Party\'s platform reaffirmed its loyalty
to the enforcement of the Constitution\'s laws and the 18th Amendment,
which prohibited the sale, transportation, and manufacture of alcohol.
During the presidential election that year, prohibition was a major
point of contention between Democratic candidate Alfred E. Smith and the
Republican nominee, Herbert Hoover, who went on to win the election. The
Republican platform of 1932 commended President Hoover\'s \"intensive
and effective drive\" against criminals and stated that the party favors
the enactment of rigid penal laws to help stamp out \"gangsters.\" Yet
Hoover lost that year to Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, who as part of
his New Deal went on to expand Hoover\'s drive against criminals into a
war on crime.



Although organized crime had certainly existed
in American before World War I, federal legislators had generally
considered the problem to be the province of state and local
authorities. But as organized crime increasing pervaded the national
consciousness, Congress began to react \-- first with antiracteering
statues enacted in 1934 and 1946 and later with the proceedings of the
Senate Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in Interstate
Commerce, otherwise known as the Kefauver Crime Committee after its
chairman Estes Kefauver, a Tennessee Democrat. The committee, formed in
1950, included Republicans Charles W. Tobey of New Hampshire and
Alexander Wiley of Wisconsin.


During the second half of the 20th century, growing concern over
organized crime, drug abuse, and violent crime as well as the advent of
the civil rights movement brought a massive increase in federal
involvement in law and order issues. And in the mid-1960s, a dramatic
shift in national attitude took place: Crime began to be viewed as a
national problem warranting a national solution. In fact, it was largely
the 1964 presidential campaign battle among Republican Senator Barry
Goldwater, Independent candidate George Wallace, and Democrat Lyndon B.
Johnson that returned crime to the national spotlight as a policy issue.
In reaction to Civil Rights demonstrations and a rising crime rate, both
Goldwater and Wallace included a strong law and order plank in their
campaigns. Goldwater, in particular, often referred to the \"crime in
the streets\" and the need for \"law and order.\" Both Goldwater and
Wallace accused Johnson of fostering a leniency that abetted crime.
Holding to conservative tradition, Goldwater and Wallace promised to
repress crime with a stricter enforcement of the criminal code. Johnson
responded not so much with a war on crime as a \"War on Poverty,\"
hoping to reduce the crime rate by ameliorating what such Democratic
liberals as Johnson saw as its root cause. In 1967, as the next
presidential election was approaching, the crime issue remained alive,
kept to the fore of public and political consciousness by a high crime
rate and continuing racial tensions. In February, President Johnson
presented a detailed message to Congress on crime that included a
proposal for the enactment of the Safe Streets and Crime Control Act of
1967. The act established within the Justice Department a large-scale
categorical grant program to aid states and localities in their battle
against crime. The president\'s bill, however, encountered formidable
opposition in Congress, particularly from Republicans but also from
Southern Democrats, both of which groups were becoming increasingly
disenchanted with Johnson\'s Great Society program that, they believed,
had made big promises but had fulfilled few of them. The objection to
the president\'s bill, though, was not over the need for it, but over
how the funds should be allocated. Johnson\'s bill would distribute
money to the cities; Republicans wanted the grants delivered to the
states. Amid rioting in Newark and Detroit, a subcommittee of the House
Judiciary Committee held hearings on the bill.










2 Law and Order
=========================================


Meantime, as the debate over Johnson\'s proposal continued into spring
1968, law and order again rose as a central issue in the presidential
election. Richard M. Nixon, seeking the presidency for the Republican
Party, employed the issue in his campaign, as did George Wallace, who
was running for the presidency as an Independent candidate. Both Nixon
and Wallace argued that decisive action needed to be taken against crime
\-- and that action meant enforcing the criminal laws more forcefully.
The voting public, having its attention further focused on crime by the
campaign messages of Nixon and Wallace, waited to see what Congress
would do with Johnson\'s proposal.

Despite the lack of enthusiasm among Republicans and conservative
Southern Democrats for the administration\'s bill, the House Judiciary
Committee reported out a bill that, in accordance with the president\'s
proposal, provided direct grants to local authorities. Yet 12 of the 15
Republicans on the Judiciary Committee lobbied strongly against the bill
when it was introduced to the floor. Republican Representatives William
Cahill of New Jersey, Thomas Railsback of Illinois, and Edward Beister
of Pennsylvania, along with support from House Minority Leader Gerald R.
Ford, galvanized not only their fellow Republicans but also conservative
Southern Democrats to oppose the bill in its present form. They argued
that the bill would usurp states\' rights and allow the central
government to dictate the law enforcement policies of local authorities.



The Republicans counterattacked with an alternative named the Cahill
Amendment after its sponsor. It proposed distributing block grants to
state agencies rather than grants-in-aid to local authorities. Besides
House Republicans and many Southern Democrats, 47 of 50 governors \--
many of whom were members of the Republican Party \-- supported the
Cahill Amendment. On the other hand, big city majors, a group that also
included some Republicans, backed the administration\'s bill. Thus,
division had arose within the Republican party over the Safe Streets and
Crime Control Act. But the small fracture between the Republican mayors
and Republican governors did not keep Republicans in the House of
Representatives from rejecting the administration\'s bill in favor of a
bill sanctioning a stronger state role \-- which was what the Republican
governors had wanted.



Next, the Senate Judiciary Committee began considering the
administration\'s bill. The committee\'s chairman, Democrat John
McClellan or Arkansas, frowned upon Johnson\'s proposal. Backed by three
other Southern Democrats on the Judiciary Committee, Democrat McClellan
joined committee Republicans to rewrite the administration\'s bill to
emphasize a strong state role in fighting crime. Republican Senator
Roman Hruska of Nebraska, a conservative, became a chief sponsor of the
version that was finally adopted. However, some of the more liberal
Senate Democrats, arguing that the revised bill was anti-city, obtained
a compromise stipulating that states had to funnel percentages of the
grants to local government units. In the end, like in the House,
Republicans joined forces with conservative Southern Democrats to rout
the administration\'s bill and substitute a state-oriented version for
it. President Johnson reluctantly signed the Omnibus Crime Control and
Safe Streets Act of 1968 into law, saying that it contained \"more good
than bad.\" The act, which included the establishment of the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration, was a victory for critics of the
Great Society, including the Republican Party. The enforcement
administration survived into the 1980s, when battles over the federal
budget phased it out. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the
administration of Republican President Richard Nixon continued the
attack against crime begun by Johnson \-- but with an emphasis on law
and order. Nixon\'s policy, however, came under attack, largely from
liberals, who saw Nixon\'s law and order campaign as attempts to put
down civil rights activists and anti-war demonstrators. President Nixon,
on the other hand, used the rising public sentiment that city streets
were unsafe to assail members of the Democrat Party as being \"soft on
crime.\"





3 From Nixon to Reagan
=======================================================


President Nixon helped several pieces of anticrime become law, including
the landmark Organized Crime Control Act of 1970. Sponsored by Senator
McClellan, the conservative Southern Democrat from Arkansas, and Senator
Samuel J. Ervin, a conservative Democrat from North Carolina, the act
included Title IX, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
statue, which launched a concerted drive against organized crime. The
statue established severe criminal and civil penalties for using
racketeering money or procedures in authentic businesses. But it also
led to numerous civil lawsuits, which in turn prompted Congress to
review the statue.



In 1970, President Nixon also helped encourage passage of the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Control Act, which reinforced narcotics
penalties. Yet the act did not stop the issue of drug abuse from
reappearing in nearly every election year thereafter; the issue
eventually culminated during the 1980s in conservative Ronald Reagan\'s
\"war on drugs\" and, later, passage of the 1988 Anti-Drug Abuse Act,
which further increased penalties for both users and dealers,
established a cabinet-level drug czar, and set aside additional federal
funds to fight drugs.


But Nixon\'s criticism of the Democrats and his anticrime crusade soon
ebbed, as he found himself accused of perpetuating criminal acts as part
of the Watergate affair and several of his high-ranking administration
officials \-- including Republican Vice President Spiro Agnew and
Attorney General John N. Mitchell \-- convicted of violating the law.
The 1980 campaign of conservative Republican presidential candidate
Ronald Reagan revived the Republican Party\'s law and order theme and
reinvigorated crime as a national political issue after it had flagged
slightly during the latter half of the 1970s. After being elected
president, Reagan\'s anticrime policies focused on repressing, rather
than preventing, crime. During Reagan\'s tenure, fighting crime
translated into combatting drug trafficking and abuse. He expanded the
federal government\'s drug interdiction effort while Nancy Reagan, the
first lady, led a \"Just Say No\" campaign that equated drug use with
immorality. In 1986 Congress passed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act, which
greatly expanded Reagan\'s war against trafficking and abuse.


As Reagan\'s drug war heated up, a three-way division emerged among
prominent Republicans in administration over how to carry out the drug
war. Attorney General Edwin Meese, a conservative Republican, advocated
getting tough with drug users. He said drug testing should be required
of all workers, arguing that it reduces accidents and boosts
productivity while keeping people from disobeying the law. Another
faction, led by Otis Bowen, Reagan\'s secretary of health and human
services, stressed education and rehabilitation, an approach often
advocated by Democrats. William J. Bennett, a conservative who served as
Reagan\'s Secretary of Education, argued for greater military
involvement in stemming the influx of drugs. He also urged Reagan to
appoint a drug czar, but the president opposed it on grounds that it
would mean more \"big government.\" Despite the Reagan administration\'s
efforts to eradicate drugs, many political analysts saw the issue as a
political defeat for Reagan, largely because the war against drugs had
not been won. And many thought it could not be won. But that view did
not stop Republican President George Bush from continuing Reagan\'s
antidrug drive among his crime-fighting efforts. After passage of the
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, which created a cabinet-level drug czar,
Bush appointed Bennett to the post after Republican Senator Dennis
DeConcini of Arizona turned it down. Bennett focused on combatting
street sales of drugs and on financing antidrug efforts in the countries
from which the drugs were originating. During the 1990s, crime has
remained a dominant political issue. Following the bombing of the World
Trade Center in New York and the attack on the Federal Building in
Oklahoma City, President Bill Clinton, a moderate Democrat, fought for a
crime bill aimed at combatting terrorism.

4 Moderate-Conservative Rift
===================================================================

In late 1994, conservative Republicans, led by Newt Gingrich, the
Speaker of the House from Georgia, tendered a plan to reduce crime
prevention spending by \$5 billion, starting a conflict that polarized
the Republican Party along conservative-moderate lines. Conservatives
maintained that such spending is wasteful, while the moderates in the
party favored crime prevention spending, arguing that it is cheaper than
building prisons. Conservative Gingrich, in particular, has called crime
prevention proposals \"pork.\" The proposals include such programs as
the establishment of \"drug courts\" that obtain treatment for addicts
and midnight basketball leagues that give teenagers an alternative to
hanging out on city streets. Moderate Republicans \-- including not only
some of those in Congress but also those at the state and local levels
\-- insisted that Congress allow local authorities flexibility in how to
combat crime. Besides cutting federal money for crime prevention,
conservatives in Congress, especially the authors of the Contract with
America, have sought to alter President Clinton\'s \"community
policing\" drive to emphasize hiring more police officers and buying
more crime-fighting hardware. Newt Gingrich has said that people who
dial 911 want \"a policeman, not a social worker.\"



Other Republicans in Congress disagreed with Gingrich and his allies,
however. Utah Senator Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Judiciary Committee,
argued instead that federal crime policy should be aimed at empowering
local citizens against crime by allowing them to spend federal anticrime
money without detailed restrictions. Representative Henry Hyde of
Illinois, an independent-minded Republican who is chairman of the House
Judiciary Committee, has also voiced disagreements with Gingrich\'s
approach. Despite opposition from some of his fellow conservative
Republicans, Gingrich has held firm. In fact, he has hardened his
repression-over-prevention approach further. Speaking to the Republican
National Committee in July 1995, Gingrich called for the death penalty
for anyone caught shipping narcotics into the country.

Meanwhile, the Clinton administration has resisted attacks on its crime
policies by the conservative Contract with America Republicans. Attorney
General Janet Reno, appointed by President Clinton, has argued forcibly
for the effectiveness of community policing, adding that it has the
overwhelming support of the public. Clinton also set up a National
Commission on Crime Control and Prevention and charged it with
developing a strategy for controlling and preventing crime and violence.
Other major points of contention over crime policy during the mid 1990s
included search and seizure rights and, especially, federal aid.
Expanding police powers of search and seizure has been high on the GOP
anti-crime agenda. In particular, Republicans have been seeking to alter
the \"exclusionary rule\" to permit illegally obtained evidence to be
used in court as long as the police officer involved believed that he
was acting in good faith at the time of seizure.



Reports in 1995 showed the overall level of crime declining slightly for
the third year in a row, and such Republicans as Representative Bill
McCollum of Florida attributed some of the dip to making convicts serve
longer prison sentences, another policy for which Republicans have
advocated during the 1990s. In fact, the Grand Old Party\'s anticrime
proposal of 1995 included a provision that would require violent
criminals to serve 85 percent of their prison terms. Such hardline
policies as determinate sentencing advocated by conservative Republicans
have not been without their costs, however, resulting in a U.S. prison
population proportionately larger than that of any other country.



During the 1996 Republican presidential primaries, gambling became an
issue. Ultra-conservative candidate Pat Buchanan said the gambling
industry in such states as Louisiana \"corrupts communities, beginning
with politicians.\" Senator Richard Lugar, also a Republican 1996
presidential candidate, called for a national study of gambling\'s
effects on crime. As the presidential election of 1997 approaches, the
issue of crime \-- whether it focuses on drug control, gambling, prison
sentences, or prevention \-- promises to remain a prominent issue that
will continue to divide not only Republicans from Democrats but also
moderate Republicans from conservatives.


5 Bibliography
=======================================


Bacon, Donald C.; Davidson, Roger H.; Keller, Morton; editors. The
Encyclopedia of the United States Congress, New York: Simon & Schuster,
1995.



Barnes, Fred. \"Dopey.\" The New Republic, May 23, 1988.



Feeley, Malcolm M. and Sarat, Austin D. The Policy Dilemma: Federal
Crime Policy and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980.



Harris, Richard. Justice: The Crisis of Law, Order, and Freedom in
America, New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, Inc., 1970.



Porter, Kirk H. and Johnson, Donald Bruce. National Party Platforms:
1840-1964, Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1966.



Tromanhauser, Edward D. The Shaping of Crime Policy, Chicago: The Union
Institute, 1990.



Gest, Ted. \"Congress and Cops.\" U.S. News & World Report. December 26,
1994.







6 Related
=============================


See *[The Nation](https://www.thenation.com/)* magazine for
clear-headed political commentary on current affairs and policy.


6.1 Republican Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-school-prayer-policy.html)



6.2 Democratic Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-school-prayer-policy.html)



