---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: 'This article describes the education policy of the Republican Party.'
keywords: |
    education policy, republican party, democratic party, democrats,
    republicans, G.I. Bill, education aid, education legislation, public
    education
title: Education Policy of the Republican Party
---


Last updated on July 29, 2004\
This essay appears in The Encyclopedia of the American Democratic and
Republican Parties, published by the International Encyclopedia Society.
The encyclopedia won the Choice Outstanding Academic Book Award in
1997.\


1 The Early Days
===========================================


Through most of its history, the Republican party has alternated between
outright opposition to federal involvement in education and limited
support for it. The party, however, began its early years by backing
federal educational assistance \-- in fact, Republicans were among the
first U.S. politicians to propose significant federal aid for education.
But by the 20th century, the party had shifted its position to a general
skepticism that at times gave way to limited support. Even at the times
when backing limited aid, though, the party retained its stipulation
that in administering the aid, the federal government must in no way
interfere with state and local control of schools. There have also been
occasional periods of strong Republican support for federal educational
assistance, particularly during the 1960s, often in response to social
crisis or threats to national security.



Within the party, Conservative Republicans have in general taken a
stronger stance against federal involvement in education, while it has
been the moderate Republicans who have most often leaned toward
supporting it. Oregon Senator Wayne Morse, for instance, began his
political career has a moderate Republican who increasingly worked to
pass legislation supporting education. Eventually, Morse switched to the
Democratic Party \-- and became an even stronger voice for educational
legislation.



In the party\'s early years, many Republicans not only backed but also
proposed laws to assist education. In fact, among the first attempts to
render such aid was made by a Republican: Representative Justin Morrill
of Vermont. The Morrill Act, introduced in 1857, sought to donate land
to states and territories for colleges. Morrill\'s measure was vetoed in
1857 by Democratic President James Buchanan, who maintained that it
unconstitutionally interfered with states\' rights, an objection that
would later be adopted by the Republican Party and used against
proposals offered by the Democrats.



While the objection that federal involvement in education interferes
with states\' rights has often been used by the Republican Party, the
constitutionality of federal aid for public schooling is considered by
many to have been settled by precedence. Nevertheless, some in the
Republican Party, no doubt, still consider it a legitimate objection.
Legally, the argument seems to hold little validity. Indeed, even in the
early years of the battle over aid for education, the constitutionality
argument failed to persuade Congress. A resubmitted Morrill Act was
passed in 1862 and signed into law by President Abraham Lincoln, himself
a Republican.



Constitutionality aside, the proper role of the federal government in
public education was to increasingly become a point of contention
between Democrats and Republicans. The two parties would put forth
various arguments for and against such aid. The most prominent arguments
were over the need for federal aid for education, the appropriate extent
of federal involvement in education, whether the federal government can
and should try to help equalize education, and whether the federal
government could afford to offer its help. But before these arguments
became more fully enunciated, the education issue, long at the margins
of political debate and legislation, had to evolve into one of greater
prominence.



After the Civil War, President Andrew Johnson, a so-called War Democrat
nominated by the Union Party, the name adopted by the Republican
National Convention of 1864, approved a federal Department of Education
in March of 1867. The department was soon demoted and renamed the Office
of Education from 1870 to 1939, when it was subsumed under the Federal
Security Agency, later the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
Congress reestablished the Department of Education on May 4, 1980.



In 1870 Republican President Ulysses S. Grant urged Congress to support
primary education with grants, making him the first president to
actively back federal aid for education. Grant further implored Congress
to use all its power to encourage education. During the year of Grant\'s
request, the congressional struggle over the issue began when George F.
Hoar, a Republican representative from Massachusetts, introduced a bill
to provide general aid to public schools. Although Hoar\'s bill never
came to a vote, it served to focus attention on the issue.



Two years later, in 1872, the Republican Party began using federal aid
for education in its campaign literature, which exhibited the party\'s
support for federal educational assistance, a stance that would be
reversed by the 1920 presidential election. In 1876 \-- the first year
in which federal involvement in education was mentioned in a major party
platform \-- the Republican Convention of 1876 vowed to support a
constitutional amendment forbidding the use of public funds for
sectarian education. In 1879 Republican President Rutherford B. Hayes
continued Grant\'s policies, urging Congress to formulate measures that
would supplement local funds with federal aid. In 1880 James A.
Garfield, also a Republican, captured the presidency with a campaign
platform that included national backing for education. The Republican
who took the helm after Garfield\'s death, Chester Arthur, backed
federal educational aid in the speeches he made to Congress, as did
Republican Benjamin Harrison after being elected president in 1888.


In 1876 the Democratic Party took a view that the party and its
candidates would repudiate after having remained nearly silent on the
issue for several election years: the platform declared that the
establishment and support of the public schools belonged exclusively to
the states. Then, as the Republican platforms of 1880 and 1884 and the
Republican presidents of 1880 and 1888 endorsed national support for
education, the Democrats kept quiet. Then from 1880 to 1920 the
Democratic Party platforms made little mention of the subject. After the
1888 presidential election, the Republicans also dropped the issue,
which did not resurface significantly until the party platform of 1920
expounded a different view: It endorsed support for vocational and
agricultural training. The Democrats, on the other hand, now favored
federal aid to education. The parties\' respective positions had begun
their reversal.



During the early 1920s, Republican President William G. Harding opposed
a cabinet-level Department of Education, validating the Republican
Party\'s shift on the issue.



But then in 1924, another slight alteration occurred. The Republican
Party\'s platform exhorted the establishment of a cabinet department of
education and relief. As president, Republican Calvin Coolidge paid
little attention to the issue, taking place largely in Congress at the
time. In 1928, the Republican Platform merely cited the enrollment
increases at colleges and technical schools as signs of the Coolidge
administration\'s success.



2 New Legislation Bolsters Education
===================================================================================


Meanwhile, the 20th century brought social crises that manifested
themselves in bills, occasionally proposed by Republicans, for new
legislation to assist education. The rate of selective service
rejections, for instance, prompted demands for aid in 1918, just as the
rejections during the World War II draft rekindled the debate over
federal aid. World War II also brought legislation to supplement
education in communities affected by the war effort. And World War II
prompted an extensive program that gave millions of returning veterans
the money to attend college: the G.I. Bill, passed in 1944 under the
official name of the Service Man\'s Readjustment Act. After World War
II, a teacher shortage inspired the aid proposals of the late 1940s. The
Depression of the 1930s led to emergency aid to education. And the baby
boom of the 1950s spawned school construction bills. The Cold War and
the Soviet Union\'s launching of Sputnik in 1957 helped spur the
National Defense Education Act. The civil rights demonstrations of the
1960s encouraged legislation to help equalize educational opportunity.
Yet to a degree beyond that established by any one of these social
crises, initiatives \-- including some from Republicans \-- emerged for
general federal assistance for education, though they were not to arise
in earnest until the 1930s.

Republican President Herbert Hoover, however, in a remark encouraging to
those in favor of federal aid to education, said in his inaugural
address: \"Although education is primarily a responsibility of the
states and local communities and rightly so, yet the nation as a whole
is vitally concerned in its development everywhere to the highest
standards and to complete universality.\" Hoover\'s Secretary of the
Interior, Ray Lyman Wilbur, soon disillusioned those previously
encouraged by the president\'s inaugural remark by rejecting both
federal aid and the establishment of a Department of Education.
President Hoover, responding to the controversy over the federal
government\'s proper role in education, appointed a committee, the
National Advisory Committee on Education, to study the matter. In
October of 1931, the committee unveiled its report, the first
comprehensive survey of federal educational activities. The panel\'s
recommendations included creating a Department of Education, having the
Office of Education conduct further studies to determine whether federal
aid was needed, and eliminating educational grants for vocational
education. The committee concluded that if vocational education was to
be subsidized, it should be done through general federal grants
exercised at the discretion of the state. Hoover choose to heed only the
suggestion to end the vocational program, but his proposal was quashed
by Congress.



During the election years of 1936 and 1940 a hush fell over the issue of
education, with the Republican platforms denouncing the New Deal
administration in general as usurping states\' rights and \"failing
America.\" The 1944 platform, again blasting the New Deal in general,
mentions that the federal government should avoid involvement in
education to keep schools \"free.\" The postwar era ushered in a period
of federal involvement of education that expanded the government\'s role
to proportions previously unseen. Party platforms in the years after the
war reveal that the Republican Party generally opposed educational
assistance, though it supported limited aid in 1956 and 1960. Meantime,
the Democrats consistently favored federal aid to education.



Yet after the war, certain elected Republicans campaigned in favor of
limited assistance, and some of these Republicans possessed such power
that other party members in Congress followed. For example, between 1943
and 1947 Republican Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, a member of the
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, began to lean toward the cause of
education. Senator Taft\'s inclinations were highly influential. Many
committee senators, as well as many in the rest of the Senate, were
willing to heed the demands of Senator Taft, considered an expert on
education policy. Known as Mr. Republican for his conservative views,
Senator Taft was the chairman of the committee from 1947 to 1949. But
Senator Taft\'s backing of education was not without its intra-party
conflicts. For instance, he often clashed with Republican Representative
Fred Hartley of New Jersey, who led the House Labor and Education
Committee from 1947 to 1949. As Taft and Hartley battled it out, the
Republican Party\'s plank, as contained in the platform of 1948, vaguely
favored \"equality of educational opportunity for all and the promotion
of education and educational facilities.\"



3 Conflict Intensifies
=======================================================


By the election of 1952, the issue had moved further into the spotlight,
and the Democratic and Republican parties took sharply contrasting
positions. The Democratic Party refined its position of the previous
elections by calling for aid for school construction, teachers\'
salaries, and school repair. The Republican Party countered with the
following platform statement: \"The responsibility for sustaining this
system of popular education has always rested with local communities and
the states. We subscribe fully to this principle.\" Following five terms
and 20 continuous years of Democrats in the White House, newly elected
Republican President Dwight D. Eisenhower, holding firm to his party\'s
platform, strongly opposed federal support for education. The Eisenhower
administration asked Congress to postpone action on the issue until
after the White House Conference on Education, scheduled for 1954. A
majority of the conference participants endorsed federal education aid
and a large majority recommended construction aid to meet a shortage of
classrooms. The conference\'s recommendations helped shift the
Eisenhower administration\'s position. In 1955, 1956, and 1957 President
Eisenhower endorsed, with tempered enthusiasm, federal measures of
limited magnitude to facilitate school construction. The president was
willing to back school construction because it strictly limited the
amount of money to be allocated and because it reduced the likelihood of
federal control over schools.



Meantime, by 1956 the Republican Party itself turned toward supporting
education, lessening in the process some of its differences with the
Democrats, who continued promoting an array of educational programs. In
its platform, the Republican Party cited the action by their elected
officials that created the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
And at the convention, the Grand Old Party praised the Eisenhower
administration\'s school construction initiative and vowed to renew
party efforts to ensure its approval.



In 1958, however, the Eisenhower administration revoked its backing of
school construction, instead urging Congress to approve the National
Defense Education Act. With the Republican president advocating the
measure and Congress sanctioning it with bipartisan support, its passage
signaled an expanded role for the federal government in education. The
expansion was prompted in part by concerns over the country\'s national
defense and rate of scientific advancement. These concerns had arisen
after the Soviets\' launched Sputnik the previous year and in response
to the Cold War in general. The act supported science, math, and foreign
language programs in public schools.


With the next presidential election, partisan controversy over education
gathered with renewed vigor. Although the platforms of both parties
supported federal aid in principle in 1960, the kind of support they had
in mind was different. The Republicans maintained that primary
responsibility for education should remain with local communities and
the state, but endorsed selective federal assistance for school
construction. The party platform also voiced support for efforts to
equalize educational opportunities and to strengthen vocational
schooling. But the party stopped short of endorsing the wide-ranging
assistance program advocated by the Democrats. In arguing against such a
program, the Republican platform restated what had by now become one of
its standard objections: \"Any large plan of federal aid to education,
such as direct contributions to or grants for teachers salaries can only
lead ultimately to federal domination and control of our schools.\" The
Democrats called for generous financial support for, among other
educational programs, teachers\' salaries and construction of classrooms
and other facilities. The contrast between the two parties\' policies
blossomed into a major domestic issue of the presidential campaign \-- a
campaign that also compelled the two parties in Congress to solidify
their positions.



Senator John F. Kennedy, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1960,
seized upon federal support for schools and attempted to make it a major
issue in the election. He blasted President Eisenhower for giving only
limited support to the issue and attacked the Republican candidate for
president, Vice President Richard M. Nixon, for backing only a limited
construction program and for referring to federal aid for education as
\"too extreme.\" After the election, which the Republican presidential
ticket lost, the Kennedy-Johnson administration\'s vigorous advocacy for
education and a sympathetic Congress resulted in several major measures
that provided schools with federal aid.


4 The Inter-Party Rift Grows
===================================================================


The rift between the parties only grew during the 1964 presidential
campaign, which was characterized by vast differences in ideological
positions among the candidates and their parties. Presidential candidate
Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican from Arizona, maintained that
support for education was a step toward subordinating state and local
governments to administrative divisions of the central government in
Washington. He also held that there was no educational problem requiring
federal aid. Senator Goldwater has been one of the most prominent and
unrelenting voices against federal intervention in education on
constitutional grounds. The 1964 platform of the Republican Party did
allow tax credits for those burdened by the costs of higher education.



In contrast, Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson was a strong
advocate of the strengthened role of the federal government and the
strongest supporter of federal aid for education yet to occupy the White
House. Johnson\'s platform promised additional and expanded aid to
supplement those programs enacted by what had been dubbed the
\"Education Congress of 1963.\" By the election of 1968, the Republican
Party again shifted to a more moderate position, citing inadequate
education in urban areas and pledging to bring about high-quality
education for all. The platform backed grants, loans, and work-study
programs for students as well as continuing to favor tax credits to help
offset the cost of college for needy students. The platform advocated
expanded programs for preschool children and suggested the establishment
of a commission to study educational quality.



In 1968, Republican Richard M. Nixon was elected president. Among the
actions he took on education was telling Congress in 1970 to establish a
National Institute of Education. A bill creating the institute became
law in 1972. President Nixon also sent Congress a proposal to halt
court-ordered busing. Instead, Nixon proposed to allocate \$2.5 billion
to improve school quality while preserving neighborhood schools.


In 1972, the Republican Party, in agreement with its president, opposed
busing for racial balance. The party\'s platform statement also lauded
the 60 percent increase in the amount spent on elementary and secondary
education by the Office of Education during the past four years of
Republican rule. Such spending \-- and Republican Party backing of it
\-- was to fall during the Republican administrations of Presidents
Ronald Reagan and George Bush that began in 1980, the next year in which
a Republican sat in the White House after the Nixon-Ford administration.



During the administration of Democrat Jimmy Carter, the tuition tax
credit emerged as an issue. Introduced in January 1977 by Republican
Senator William Roth of Delaware and backed by many other Republican
senators, the tax-credit bill was originally intended to set up a credit
for tuition paid for postsecondary schooling. The bill was expanded to
cover tuition spent on private elementary and secondary schooling by
Senator Robert Packwood, an Oregon Republican. In 1978 a bill to furnish
students with financial aid was offered in response to the tuition tax
credit and became law. The measure, however, did not end but only
postponed additional Republican calls for a tuition tax credit.



Taking office in 1980, President Ronald Reagan, a conservative
Republican, redefined the education policy of the federal government, in
effect ending 30 years of liberal educational spending that often
received at least limited bipartisan backing. President Reagan
successfully directed the focus of federal education policy away from
funding programs and toward using moral suasion to hasten change. He
significantly reduced the government\'s role in education and
decentralized many programs. He failed, however, to fulfill his campaign
promises of abolishing the Department of Education, passing a school
prayer amendment, and instituting a tuition tax credit.



In 1985, after Reagan\'s first Secretary of Education, Terrel Bell,
resigned, conservative William J. Bennett took his place. Bennett
announced that he would use the post as a \"bully pulpit\" to push
conservative policies and values. Bennett argued for a Western
Civilization-based core curriculum and against multicultural and other
liberal programs.


5 An \"Education President\" without Initiatives
=========================================================================================================


Republican George Bush, formerly Reagan\'s vice president, was elected
president in 1988, partly on the plank of being \"the education
president.\" In general, President Bush, though slightly less
conservative than Reagan, continued Reagan\'s policy of devolution in
education. The first Bush budget, however, did contain some new
initiatives. For instance, it earmarked money for the Drug Free Schools
and Communities Act and for magnet schools. Republican Calls for
educational reform during the era advocated institutional competition
among schools and adequate training for entering the job market.
President Bush also renewed the call for a tuition tax credit.



In the elections of 1994, Republicans gained control of Congress, and
quickly set out to slash funds from various education programs, arguing
that the government\'s deficit necessitates cutbacks. Republican
Representative Newt Gingrich\'s Contract With America further targeted
education and job training for budget reductions as Congress and the
Democratic Clinton administration clashed over balancing the budget.



In the Republican primaries of 1996, the issue surfaced over whether
parents should be given school vouchers to send their children to
private, public or religious schools. Bob Dole, Phil Gramm, and Dick
Lugar have come out in support of vouchers, arguing that they would
allow parents greater freedom in deciding how their children should be
educated. Pat Buchanan has said he would only favor vouchers if there
were no \"government strings\" attached. Lamar Alexander supports
scholarships that students can use at public, private, or religious
schools.



The positions of the presidential candidates of 1996 illustrate how
Republican positions toward education have changed with the political
and social climates of the times. The party\'s general position has
moved from its early proposals of support to giving the issue little
attention during the earlier part of the 20th century. After World War
II, the party\'s position alternated between limited backing and
disavowal of all support. The 1960s brought a time of expanded federal
involvement in education, and many elected Republicans played a part in
sanctioning the programs. The conservative presidencies of Reagan and
Bush brought a renewed and intensified conservative Republican attack on
federal education programs, leading to substantial cutbacks in many of
the programs established during the 1950s, \'60s, and \'70s. The
Republican Party of the 1990s continues its call for less government on
ideological grounds and less aid to education because of fiscal
restraints. Continuing a long-running Republican demand of the 20th
century, the chorus of current Republicans continues to stipulate that
if the federal government does provide aid for education, it must do so
without interfering with local control of schools \-- and, increasingly,
in the freedom of parents to do what they think is right for their
children.


6 Bibliography
=======================================


Johnson, Donald Bruce. National Party Platforms: Volume II, 1960-1976,
Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1978.



Meranto, Philip. The Politics of Federal Aid to Education in 1965: A
Study in Political Innovation, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press,
1967.



Mitchell, Douglas E. and Goertz, Margaret E., editors, Education
Politics for the New Century, Bristol, PA: The Falmer Press, Taylor &
Francis, Inc., 1990.



Munger, Frank J. and Fenno, Richard F., Jr. National Politics and
Federal Aid to Education, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1962.



Porter, Kirk H. and Johnson, Donald Bruce. National Party Platforms:
1840-1964, Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1966.



Spring, Joel. Conflicts of Interest: The Politics of American Education,
White Plains, NY: Longman, 1988.



Tiedt, Sidney, W. The Role of the Federal Government in Education, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1966.



7 Related
=============================


See *[The Nation](https://www.thenation.com/)* magazine for
clear-headed political commentary on current affairs and policy.


7.1 Republican Party
-------------------------------------------------



* [Crime Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-school-prayer-policy.html)



7.2 Democratic Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-school-prayer-policy.html)

