---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: 'This article describes the health care policy of the Republican Party.'
keywords: |
    health care policy, republican party, democratic party, democrats,
    republicans, health legislation, health care legislation
title: Health Care Policy of the Republican Party
---
Last updated on July 29, 2004. <i class="fa fa-calendar" aria-hidden="true"></i> \
This essay appears in The Encyclopedia of the American Democratic and
Republican Parties, published by the International Encyclopedia Society.
The encyclopedia won the Choice Outstanding Academic Book Award in
1997. <i class="fa fa-trophy" aria-hidden="true"></i> \


1 In the Beginning: Opposition
====================================================


Although federal health care began after the prompting of a Republican
senator, the Grand Old Party, increasingly weary of enlarging the
central government, soon became opposed to most health legislation.
Conservative Republicans of the 20th century have stood almost without
exception against federal involvement in health initiatives beyond
research, arguing that such programs usurp states\' rights and can lead
only to socialized medicine. The positions of moderate Republicans have
varied by elected politician, with some occasionally proposing or
supporting legislation to expand federal health services. Among the
Republicans who have significantly battled to thwart health care
legislation stands President Dwight D. Eisenhower, who quelled for
nearly a decade the gaining momentum of Democrats in Congress fighting
for a national insurance act. Republican Senator Reed Smoot of Utah
proved himself to be a formidable early opponent of federal health care.
On the other hand, a few moderate Republicans, notably Senator Jacob K.
Javits and Representative James S. Parker, both of New York, became
legislative forces behind an expansion of federal health services.



Federal health care began in 1798 with an Act for Relief of Sick and
Disabled Seamen, which created the Marine Hospital Service, the
progenitor Public Health Service, the name that the agency took
following passage of the Public Health and Marine Service Act of 1902.
The bill was enacted after Republican Senator John C. Spooner of
Wisconsin for changes in the public health service. But by 1908, the
Republican Party\'s attitude began to show signs of opposition to the
public health bureaucracy. The party\'s platform commended efforts to
secure greater efficiency in health agencies and favored legislation
toward that end.



Then in 1922 and in 1925, Republican Senator Smoot tried unsuccessfully
to combine the Public Health Service with the Veterans\' Bureau and to
curtail its authority. Smoot\'s early attempt at consolidation and
devolution \-- which would be followed by additional and at times more
successful Republican attempts at reductions \-- was thwarted by Surgeon
General Hugh Cumming. But during the 1920s, not all members of the
Republican Party sought to curtail federal health care. In 1926,
Republican Representative James S. Parker of New York, urged by Surgeon
General Cumming, introduced a bill to expand the authority and services
of the Public Health Service. In 1928, the Parker Bill passed both
houses only to be vetoed by Republican President Calvin Coolidge.



Also in 1926, Democratic Senator Joseph E. Ransdell of Louisiana, the
chairman of the Public Health Committee, introduced a bill to create a
national institute of health. The proposal, however, languished in
Congress for four years, encountering indifference from many members and
facing determined opposition from Republican President Calvin
Coolidge\'s Bureau of the Budget. During 1928, Republican Senator Smoot
prevented its passage the Ransdell Act\'s passage.



Yet in 1930, despite the early opposition, both the Parker and Ransdell
Acts became law, determining the direction of the Public Health Service
for the next 40 years. The Parker Act, officially known as the Public
Health Service Amendments of 1930, enhanced the authority and operations
of the service. The Ransdell Act was officially known as the National
Institute of Health Act. Acting contrary to what would become a general
opposition of most elected members of the Republican Party to federal
health care, Republican President Herbert Hoover was supportive of the
bills, helping to cultivate their chances of passage. Congressional
interest in cancer research and crises of influenza and psittacosis also
helped propel the bills\' passage.



The next big battle over health care came in 1946, when Democratic
Senators Lester Hill of Alabama and Harold H. Burton of Ohio introduced
a bill to help defray the costs of hospital construction. But the
influential Senator Robert A. Taft, an Ohio Republican, frowned upon the
bill because, he believed, it allowed for too much federal control. In
order to gain his backing, Senator Taft wanted the measure to contain
assurances of states rights and local control, money set aside according
to state assessments of need, and matching funds for local hospital
boards. Hill\'s measure appealed to many Southern Republican
conservatives in Congress because it promised to funnel aid to their
states. Even Senator Taft was eventually persuaded to back the bill by a
funding formula that awarded the largest sums to the poorest states.








2 Citing Equality, Truman Pushes Insurance
====================================================

Democratic President Harry S. Truman announced in his state of the Union
speech of 1948 that his goal was \"to enact a comprehensive insurance
system which would remove the money barrier between illness and
therapy.\" For Truman, national health insurance was an issue of
equality, and his speech triggered the Democrat-backed drive for a
national insurance program. Republicans, however, disagreed with both
the need for and the philosophy behind such a program.



In early 1949, President Truman urged Congress to act on medical
insurance. Soon thereafter, Democrats presented a proposal to Congress,
but it met with strong opposition from Republicans who had formed a
coalition with anti-Truman conservative Southern Democrats. They
combined forces to successfully block the insurance proposal; it was
never reported out of committee. In 1950, \'51, and \'52, President
Truman continued to push for compulsory health insurance. But the
prospects for such a bill\'s passage appeared bleak after 1949,
especially when the elections of 1950 increased the Republicans\'
presence in the House by more than 25 members and nearly allowed them to
take control of the Senate.



Despite their crusade against Truman\'s insurance proposal, many
Republicans in Congress were committed to funding the medical research
of the federal government. One Republican in particular \-- H. Styles
Bridges of New Hampshire \-- teamed up with several Democrats to gain
passage of the National Heart Institute Act in 1948 and the Omnibus
Medical Research Act of 1950, which established new institutes for
health research.



Through the 1950s and especially after 1955, Congress maintained strong
bipartisan support for medical research, resulting in increased funding
for the National Institutes of Health in 1957 and 1958.



The 1952 election that installed Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower as
president shattered all possibility of a Democrat-supported compulsory
insurance bill. In fact, under President Eisenhower, no substantial
medical bill had a chance of passage. Even after the Democrat Party
regained control of Congress in 1954, they still lacked enough votes to
ensure a favorable majority.



The year 1958 rekindled the debate over a national health insurance
program. During that year, a member of the House Ways and Means
Committee, where at least one earlier proposal for national health
insurance had died a quiet death, Aime J. Forand, a Rhode Island
Democrat, reintroduced an insurance bill. During the 1950s, statistics
began to show that the aged had substantial health and financial
problems. But despite the statistics, the Forand Bill soon drew
opposition from conservative members of Congress, including many
Republicans, who argued that it was regressive and limited. They said it
would not offer substantial assistance to those who needed it most while
covering those who did not need it. Opponents further argued that
Americans are not poor enough to warrant compulsory government health
insurance. They added that the bill would encroach on states\' rights, a
refrain often repeated by Republicans. Although Forand\'s bill was
rejected by the House Ways and Means Committee in 1959 by a 17-8 vote,
it did serve to revive the battle over federal health care.


3 Kennedy Puts Republicans on Defensive
====================================================

The dawn of the 1960s and the presidential election of Democrat John F.
Kennedy, who campaigned on a strong social welfare platform, again put
the Republicans on the defensive against federal involvement in health
services. In February 1961, true to his party\'s campaign promises,
President Kennedy called for an extension of Social Security benefits to
cover hospital and nursing home costs but not surgical expenses for
those over 65. Senator Clinton P. Anderson, a New Mexico Democrat who
was a high-ranking member of the Finance Committee, and Representative
Cecil R. King, a California Democrat who sat on the Ways and Means
Committee, introduced the president\'s proposal as the King-Anderson
Bill. The bill, however, did not have bipartisan backing, and
Representative Mills, though a Democrat, was determined to consider in
the crucial Ways and Means Committee only a proposal that had bipartisan
support.



Besides Mills, there were another significant barriers to passage of the
King-Anderson Bill. One was the determined opposition of Republicans on
the House Ways and Means Committee who had formed a coalition with
several conservative Southern Democrats. Together, they formed a strong
enough bloc to override the favorable votes of the committee\'s urban,
pro-labor Democrats. In the House, though, the Medicare bill did have
the backing of several liberal Republicans.



Yet the aggregation of the negative factors \-- opposition from the Ways
and Means Committee\'s Republicans and Southern Democrats, especially
Chairman Mills, and President Kennedy\'s focus on other priorities \--
effectively killed the Medicare bill without even a formal committee
vote. But the battle for a national program of health insurance was not
over yet; it was only postponed. Following the assassination of
President Kennedy, the ascendancy of Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson to the
presidency brought to the White House a liberal administration committed
to social reforms as part of a \"War on Poverty.\" The election of
Johnson over Senator Barry Goldwater, a conservative Republican from
Arizona, was a turning point for the loss that the Republicans were to
suffer on Medicare. Goldwater, a long-time critic of the expanding role
of the federal government, had maintained in his campaign that any
federal health care programs were a usurpation of states\' rights and
steps toward socialized medicine, a objection often articulated by
conservative Republicans.



Following the 1964 election, the composition of committees was changed
to reflect the strength of the parties in the House as a whole. Thus, in
1965, the Ways and Means Committee shifted from 15 Democrats and 10
Republicans to 17 Democrats and 8 Republicans, further ensuring a bloc
favorable to Medicare. The fate of the reintroduced King-Anderson bill
had changed from being a possibility to a certainty. The bill continued
to include coverage of the aged, limited hospitalization and nursing
home insurance benefits, and social security financing.



Republicans reacted to the reintroduction of the King-Anderson measure
by starting to talk about alternative programs that they saw as more
positive. They put forth the following arguments as grounds for opposing
the King-Anderson Bill in favor of an alternative: It contained
inadequate benefits, with too many exclusions and limits; it was too
costly; and it did not distinguish between the poor and wealthy among
the aged. To address these concerns, Representative John W. Byrnes of
Wisconsin, the ranking Republican on the Ways and Means Committee,
proposed a bill for a voluntary insurance system. Byrnes\' bill was also
driven by the desires of Republicans on the Ways and Means Committee to
prevent the Democrats from taking exclusive credit for the health
insurance legislation that now seemed to be certainty.



Representative Mills, foreseeing that passage of the King-Anderson Bill
was now inevitable, sought to build bipartisan consensus for it. In a
brilliant legislative move that at once strengthened the proposal and
brought Republican backing to it, Mills moved to draft legislation
combining the King-Anderson hospital insurance bill with Byrnes\'
voluntary plan and an expanded state-administered Kerr-Mills program for
all medically needy people. Thus Mills\' succeeded in winning bipartisan
support for his combination bill because it appealed to the Republicans,
many of whom wanted, at most, a voluntary plan.



4 Republicans Defeated as Medicare and Medicaid Are Established
====================================================


In 1965, the Social Security Amendments of 1965 passed both houses and
were signed into law by President Johnson, establishing Medicare and
Medicaid and ending in defeat for the Republican Party a long, bitter
fight against national health insurance that began with the Roosevelt
administration and spanned the administrations of Presidents Truman and
Kennedy and part of Johnson\'s. Perhaps the most far-reaching health
care legislation passed in U.S. history, the amendments included a
hospital insurance program for Social Security recipients over 65,
funded from payroll taxes, and voluntary medical service insurance for
the same group, funding by small premiums and general revenues. It also
expanded the Kerr-Mills program for all medically needy people.


The battle of a federal health insurance program, however, did not end
with the passage of Medicare and Medicaid. The battle merely shifted \--
to what the appropriate level of funding for such programs should be.
The origins of Medicare during the 1960s also shaped the dispute over
national health insurance in the 1970s, an era during which health
policy continued to have strong appeal among Democrats and a few
Republicans in Congress.



Among the Republicans, Senator Jacob K. Javits of New York emerged as a
strong voice advocating health care legislation. His leadership in
Congress, however, was counterbalanced by Republican President Richard
M. Nixon\'s mild antagonism toward federal health programs, an
antagonism that manifested itself by calling attention to what he saw as
an overburdened health budget. President Nixon tried to better regulate
federal health programs and to terminate some of them. In particular,
the Nixon administration attacked the Public Health Service as being too
independent and too powerful.



In 1971, President Nixon suggested a plan to cut health care costs and
to spur development of health maintenance organizations for providing
care for Medicare and Medicaid recipients. Although the plan eventually
lost favor with the White House, it was embraced by several influential
Congressional Republicans, notably Senator Javits and Representative
William R. Roy of Kansas. Working with several key Democrats, they
adopted Nixon\'s plan. After three years of legislative effort, the
Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973 created an experimental
program to underwrite HMO development, and became a forerunner to the
debate over stimulating HMO use during the 1990s.



President Nixon announced in 1972 that he intended to end federal
backing for the Hill-Burton Act and several other programs and to cut
funding for other programs. He also said he would revoke funds already
appropriated to certain health care programs. Congress reacted with
anger, securing appropriations for the programs. Congress eventually
secured the grant programs at least temporarily in the Special Health
Revenue Sharing Act of 1975, passed over Republican President Ford\'s
veto. Many members of Congress, resenting Ford\'s tactics, backed the
health care leaders.



Also in 1972, Senator Wallace F. Bennett, a Utah Republican, introduced
the Public Health Service Amendments, which mandating that hospitals
receiving federal funds conduct reviews of need.



The late 1970s saw the election of Democrat Jimmy Carter to the
presidency and a subsequent respite from the health care debate. During
the 1970s, however, many in Congress, particularly Republicans, became
increasingly concerned over the rising costs of health care and voiced
those concerns during hearings on continuing the programs.


5 Reagan Assaults the System
====================================================

Conservative Republican President Ronald Reagan, soon after his election
in 1981, launched an assault on the federal health care system,
announcing plans to consolidate all 26 of the health services programs into
two block grants, one for health services, the other for preventive
health. He also announced plans to slash spending on health by 25
percent. The president\'s announcement set off a battle in Congress,
with conservatives in both parties taking up Reagan\'s charge. In the
Senate, Orrin Hatch, a conservative Republican from Utah, and Phil
Gramm, a Texas Republican, led the president\'s battle to disassemble
the federal health care programs. In the House, Republican
Representatives Edward R. Madigan of Illinois, James T. Broyhill of
North Carolina, and William E. Dannemeyer of California played key
leadership roles for the Reagan agenda.



With a few concessions to Democrats, conservative Republicans, backed by
many conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans, passed the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981. It reduced funding for all health
services programs, collapsed funding for many categorical grant programs
into block grants to states, and increased local and state governance
over remaining programs. The concessions to congressional Democrats came
only after last-minute lobbying by a group of Republican governors.


During the tenure of the Republican Reagan administration, Congress also
passed the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, which
tightened regulations on Medicare and Medicaid and established their
reimbursement rates.



Also in the early 1980s, President Reagan tried to relax federal rules
for nursing homes, but his effort met with bipartisan outcry and
eventually led to the passing of a detailed law protecting the rights
and stipulating the care of nursing home patients. Republican President
George Bush, elected in 1988, continued the Reagan administration\'s
forceful opposition to health programs, often with the backing of many
conservative members of Congress.



Running against the general Republican anti-health trend of the 1980s
and early 1990s, one Republican congresswoman joined forces with two
Democrats to pass the Women\'s Health and Equity Act. Olympia Snowe,
Republican of Maine, worked with Senator Barbara Mikulski, a Maryland
Democrat, and Representative Patricia Schroeder, an influential Colorado
Democrat, to secure passage of the bill, which created an office for
research on women\'s health at the National Institutes of Health.








6 Clinton Reignites Reform
===============================================================


The election of Democratic President Bill Clinton returned the health
care to the fore of national politics in 1992. Clinton campaigned on a
plank of reforming the nation\'s health care system. True to his
promise, he unveiled his proposal in a speech to Congress and the nation
on Sept. 22, 1993, saying that Hilary Rodham Clinton had consulted with
government leaders of both parties. He proposed a concept first conveyed
by Republican President Richard M. Nixon \-- that every employer and
every individual would be asked to contribute to national health care.



But some conservative Republicans in the House objected to any mandate
requiring employers to pay for health insurance. And in general,
Republicans argued that the Clinton plan contained excessive controls
and would put an undue burden on small businesses to pay for workers\'
insurance.



Even though Clinton\'s initiative did reflect several ideas that some
Republicans found appealing \-- including an attempt to control health
care not so much by government directive as by limiting insurance
premiums \-- the proposal was not alluring enough to survive challenges
from the strong Republican minority, led by Republican Bob Dole, the
powerful Senate Minority Leader.



In late 1995 and early 1996, Republicans, now in control of Congress,
pushed legislation to transform Medicare into a market-driven program in
order to help balance the federal budget. Such a program, Republicans
argued, would open up the Medicare market to hundreds of private health
insurers, giving elderly people a wider variety of plans. Conservative
Republican Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Speaker of the House, played a
key role in the highly partisan battle to cut Medicare spending. He won
the support of the American Medical Association, a powerful special
interest lobbying group, by making concessions to their concerns that
the plan would reduce Medicare payments to doctors. President Clinton
has threatened to veto Congress\' Medicare and Medicaid reform plan,
arguing that it would devastate the quality of care for the elderly,
especially those in nursing homes.



Republicans in Congress have also promoted proposals to repeal tough
federal standards for the quality of nursing home care as part of their
general effort to shift power and responsibility from the central
government to the states.



Meanwhile, on the local level, elected Republicans have attempted to
reform medical care through privatization, with such cities as Los
Angeles and New York spinning off city health services. In particular,
New York Mayor Rudolph Guiliani, a Republican, has said he wants New
York to get out of the hospital business. Arguments for privatization
say that the current system is inefficient, delivers poor care, and is
unprepared to compete in a managed-care marketplace.



Thus the push and pull over the future of health care policy continues.
The nature of the government\'s involvement in providing health services
remains contested ground, as it has since the beginning of the 20th
century. And, much as they have throughout the century, the battle lines
remain drawn along ideological lines, with a strong coalition of
conservative Republicans fighting vigorously against a federal role and
a less cohesive group of moderate Republicans taking a more lenient
position.



7 Bibliography
=======================================



Bacon, Donald C.; Davidson, Roger H.; Keller, Morton; editors. The
Encyclopedia of the United States Congress, New York: Simon & Schuster,
1995.



Eckholm, Erik, editor. Solving America\'s Health-Care Crisis: A Guide to
Understanding the Greatest Threat to Your Family\'s Economic Security,
New York: Times Books, 1993.



Johnson, Donald Bruce. National Party Platforms: Volume II, 1960-1976,
Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1978.



Maisel, L. Sandy, editor. Political Parties and Elections in the United
States: An Encyclopedia, New York: Garland Publishing Inc., 1991.



Marmor, Theodore R. The Politics of Medicare, Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Co., 1973.



Porter, Kirk H. and Johnson, Donald Bruce. National Party Platforms:
1840-1964, Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1966.



Stevens, Robert and Stevens, Rosemary. Welfare Medicine in America: A
Case Study in Medicaid, New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1974.



The New York Times, Health Care: Clinton\'s Plan and the Alternatives.
New York: Sunday, October 17, 1993. Page 22.


8 Related
=============================


See *[The Nation](https://www.thenation.com/)* magazine for
clear-headed political commentary on current affairs and policy.



8.1 Republican Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Republicans](republicans-school-prayer-policy.html)



8.2 Democratic Party
-------------------------------------------------


* [Crime Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-crime-policy.html)



* [Drug Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-drug-policy.html)



* [Education Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-education-policy.html)



* [Free Speech Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-free-speech-policy.html)



* [Health Care Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-health-care-policy.html)



* [Minimum Wage Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-minimum-wage-policy.html)



* [School Prayer Policy of the
Democrats](democrats-school-prayer-policy.html)






