---
description: |
	A critical analysis of Douglas Kellner's media theory as laid out in his book Media Culture: Cultural Studies, Identity and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern. Book review by Steve Hoenisch.
keywords: |
	media studies, newspapers, criticism, media theory, critical theory, Walter Benjamin, media criticism, Adorno, Horkheimer, journalism, culture, advertising, film, American politics, democracy, press, sociology, philosophy, communication, society, Douglas Kellner, media culture, Steve Hoenisch

title: |
	An Analysis of Kellner's Theory of Media Culture
---

**By Steve Hoenisch** \
Copyright 1996-2020 Steve Hoenisch | [www.Criticism.Com](https://www.criticism.com/) \
<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [Download Essay in PDF](https://www.criticism.com/md/kellner.pdf)


1 Explanatory Adequacy
======================

<img src="/images/0415105706.gif" align="right" />
**I**n an era when the media have grown to be one of the most dominant
forms of culture in North American -- so dominant, in fact, that the
they can now be seen as the pinnacle of commercial culture -- an
explanatory theory of the media becomes paramount. Yet considering the
intimate relationship between culture and media and that, for many, the
media have become their culture, a theory that views the media outside
the context of culture will be afflicted with myopia. Thus, for
completeness, a theory of the media requires a firm connection to
culture in its every step. Douglas Kellner, in his book Media Culture:
Cultural Studies, Identity and Politics Between the Modern and the
Postmodern,
sets out to make these connections.

While an adequate theory of media culture, in our era, is of deep
significance, it would nevertheless lack a fundamental connection to
more profound aspects of life -- freedom, justice, equality, and general
welfare -- without being tied to the political system that aims to
ensure such liberties. Kellner rightly endeavors "to theorize the role
of the media in a democratic society."1

The question, however, is whether he accurately captures the complexity
of the links. Does his theory, which should be subject to the same
requirements as any other theory, best explain the intricate set of
relationships
<img src="/images/0813305497.gif" align="right" />
among media, culture, and democracy? If Kellner moves to make normative
suggestions, they had best be founded on a robust account of the
situation in question; otherwise, they run the risk of irrelevancy.

Yet a theory of media culture should account for at least the following
predominant facts, which characterize the intersection of American
culture and media when viewed in the context of a democratic political
system: the treatment of politics as entertainment; the focus of image
over substance, especially pertaining to politicians and their
positions; monopoly ownership of the media by corporations; the
uniformity of perspective from which the media cover political news; the
media's seemingly vast political power, especially in light of its
proclamation of objectivity; the historical basis for the formulation of
a media culture and the history behind the media's acquisition of power
over the political system.

<img src="/images/0898624185.gif" align="right" /> With
some of these conditions in mind, I seek in this essay to assess the
explanatory power of Douglas Kellner's theory of media culture from the
perspective of participatory democracy. Such a perspective is justified
by the values that underlie Kellner's theory: the furtherance of
democracy. But because of the ubiquitous nature of the media and its
intricate relationship to democracy, a complete assessment of Kellner's
theory would quickly snowball into an uncontrollable mass. Thus, I will
attempt in several places to narrow my essay's focus while lending it a
direct connection to an aspect of media culture by assessing Kellner's
theory with respect to the news media.

Taking up such a perspective leads me to ask the following specific
questions: Does Kellner's theory, which centers on film and television,
adequately account for the role of the news media in U.S. media culture?
And, more important, does it capture and explain the intimate and
influential relationship between the news media and democratic
government?

The angle of analysis that these questions entails is itself justified
by Kellner's definition of media culture. In addition to television,
film, radio, and so forth, Kellner says, "Media culture consists of ...
print media ranging from newspapers to magazines."2 As such, his theory
of media culture should not only cover them but also explain the
relationship of their micro-media cultures, so to speak, to democracy as
well as other media. Otherwise Kellner is presenting only a theory of
television and film culture and should label it as such.

<img src="/images/1572302216.gif" align="right" />
A theory of media culture must not only account for such relationships,
but do so parsimoniously: The facts of the matter must be explained as
economically as possible with the greatest possible depth and scope.
Examining Kellner's theory as applied to a few important facts about the
relationship between media and democracy will serve as a test of his
theory's scope and depth. An analysis of his theoretical foundations and
explanatory apparatus, besides exposing any hidden presumptions, will
reveal the extent to which his theory adheres to the requirement of
economy.

During the course of this essay, it will no doubt become apparent that
Kellner has succeeded in developing a theory of media culture that
includes the strong elements of past views while discarding some
obsolete or inapplicable aspects of them. I will argue, however, that
his theory nevertheless fails to adequately explain several important
aspects of the media in relation to culture and democracy. I will also
argue that, in general, Kellner's theory relies on too much explanatory
machinery to account for too few facts: too much explanatory machinery
because Kellner borrows too generously from other theories; too few
facts because Kellner unduly limits the input of data into his model.





2 Some Principal Characteristics
================================

**B**efore beginning to assess Kellner's theory, it may be useful to
sketch in more detail a few of the above-mentioned characteristics
underlying the relationship between the U.S. media and democracy. A
complete list of such characteristics would, no doubt, be prohibitively
large. Thus
I<img src="/images/bbmonop.gif" align="right" />
shall restrict the list to either characterizations of print media or to
factors so preeminent that a theory's failure to account for them would
constitute a significant shortcoming. As a test of Kellner's theory, I
will examine the extent to which it explains the following three
conditions.

* The treatment of politics as entertainment, as
sports, with the sensationalism and superficiality that typically
accompanies coverage of sports and celebrities.

* The near-monopoly ownership of most of the country's
more than 1,000 daily newspapers by 11 corporations3 and the effect this
ownership has had on the relationship between the print media and the
process of democracy, especially in light of the traditional view that a
free press helps ensure democratic government. Such researchers as Ben
Bagdikian have described the media
monopoly;
a theory of media culture should explain it, as well as the interplay
between it, democracy, and culture. I will also examine how Kellner's
theory can allow for resistance given the control of the media by big
business.

* The uniformity of perspective with which the print
media typically cover politic events. Uniformity of perspective is
closely related to corporate monopolization of the media.







3 A Matter of Perspective
=========================

**B**efore analyzing the application of Kellner's theory to these
properties of the media, I would like to ask a deeper question: Does
Kellner's ideological perspective and his theoretical presuppositions
about media and culture provide a solid position from which to view the
properties outlined above.

Kellner is an ideologue of the left, and his analysis is heavily biased
by his ideology. Yet he redeems himself by acknowledging, in the spirit
of Max Weber, the values, the ends, that he has in mind and holds dear:
the furtherance of democracy. Kellner is concerned with how media either
inhibit or advance democracy. Kellner's form of cultural studies is an
activist one: It seeks, he says, to advance democracy and freedom. Since
I believe, like Weber, that every social scientist necessarily brings
his ideological perspective to his analysis, I will not reproach Kellner
in this regard other than to say that his conclusions should be viewed
as determined, to a certain extent, by his ideological point of
departure.

A genuine problem of perspective, however, emerges between Kellner's
broad characterization of culture and a fundamental assumption that
underlies his perspective. Kellner sees culture as a "highly
participatory activity." But he also says that Media Culture will
"explore some of the consequences for a society and culture colonized by
media culture."4

Calling culture a highly participatory activity lies in contradiction to
characterizing society as "colonized" by media culture. Willful
participation -- in the sense that Kellner uses the term to mean
creation, cultivation, and identification -- excludes colonization. Once
it has been established that media culture is (willingly) participatory,
the notion of colonization loses its import.

To think of society as "colonized" by the media presents two additional
problems of its own. First, the characterization of American society as
"colonized by media" is inaccurate (and to say, as Kellner does, that
culture is colonized by "media culture" makes little, if any, conceptual
sense). Second, such an inappropriate characterization, used as a point
of departure for inquiry, may lead the analysis astray and produce
mistaken conclusions.

Kellner's departure from these theories leads him to maintain that the
media help reproduce either dominant forms of social power or resistance
to domination, or have contradictory effects. Kellner's suggestion that
American society is "colonized by" media culture, even when the word
"colonized" is taken in its vague sociological sense of one group
imposing itself on another, is difficult to reconcile with the thesis
that media can articulate such diverse ideological positions as
domination, resistance, or both.

The difficulty in reconciling these two assumptions reveals a logical
problem in Kellner's perspective. Had Kellner not made the colonization
assumption, his view would have been implicitly consistent with the
reproduction and domination views because assumption (ii) follows, at
least to a certain extent, from (i). Yet, without making the first
assumption, and in fact making the opposite one, Kellner leaves his
adoption of possibility (ii) to the apparatus he appropriates from the
British and Frankfurt theories when he could have, in fact, derived it
logically -- and thus more parsimoniously -- from the view that American
society generates its own media culture. Borrowing the view from the
Frankfurt and British schools, while useful, brings only additional, and
perhaps ad hoc, baggage to his theory, thus weakening it. In other
words, a theory that combines the best of all previous theories to
account for a certain phenomenon -- here, media culture -- will no doubt
have vast explanatory power, but that power is acquired only through the
adaption of a great deal of theoretical apparatus.

Kellner's perspective, however, contains several strong assumptions from
the Frankfurt and British schools. From the Marx-inspired Frankfurt
school, Kellner borrows a primary assumption: That "media culture is
industrial culture, organized on the model of mass production... It is
thus a form of commercial culture and its products are commodities that
attempt to attract private profit produced by giant corporations
interested in the accumulation of capital."5

But today's media culture has added several layers atop its
industrialism and mass production, Kellner correctly acknowledges. Media
culture is also a high-tech culture, a characteristic addressed by the
Frankfurt School only marginally -- and mostly from a aesthetic
perspective and within the context of industrialization -- in such
writings as Walter Benjamin's essay "The Work of Art in the Age of
Mechanical Reproduction."

From the British, Kellner adopts their emphasis on social and political
power. For Kellner, media culture takes on sociological and political
relevance because it "demonstrates who has power and who is powerless."6

Both assumptions -- that culture is a battleground for power and that
media culture is industrial culture -- expand the lens of Kellner's
perspective, lending it a wider view for examining the relation between
media culture and the democracy.

Yet, as mentioned above, Kellner's adaptation of the best of past
theories of media and culture itself presents a theoretical problem: His
theory's explanatory power stems from the use of a great number of
generalizations about media and culture. Ideally, a theory -- even in
the realm of culture, which is no more complex than, say, language --
should achieve maximum explanatory power with the minimum number of
generalizations. A theory that stipulates an additional principle to
account for every major fact not only impinges upon its own explanatory
power but also raises the possibility that it is missing an important
generalization about the facts in question. Furthermore, as noted above,
a theory should generate its own apparatus whenever possible. By simply
borrowing as needed from previous theories, Kellner undermines the
potential of his theory to generate its own explanatory principles from
within, as I pointed out above in my discussion of the colonization
assumption.

On the other hand, Kellner's multiperspectival approach, adopted from
principles laid down by Nietzsche and Foucault, may contain the capacity
to better explain the cultural and political conditions of media than
the ideologically limited approaches taken by the Frankfurt or British
schools. The question becomes whether appropriating so much machinery
proves its worth in explanatory power.





4 Politics As Entertainment
===========================

**R**eflecting on the use of television and radio to document the
proceedings of Germany's parliament, Jurgen Habermas says that through
these two media, the debates "are stylized into a show. Publicity loses
its critical function in favor of a staged display."7 Such staged
displays, put on to achieve political ends through the format of
entertainment, have become the norm of 20th century American political
life.

Staged displays continue unabashedly today. In fact, they have only
worsened: the media's presentation of politics has moved beyond the
stage to the stadium. In its mildest forms, the press displays politics
as an absurd production unfolding on a stage for entertainment. At is
worst,<img src="/images/bkfallow.gif" align="right" />
however, politics is covered like a major sporting event. "For the
American media in the 1990s, public life is sports. The entire press has
become the sports page," James Fallows writes in Breaking the News: How
the Media Undermine American
Democracy.8

During the 1980s, some critics of the media, most notably Noam Chomsky,
argued that the press emphasized coverage of sports to deliberately
divert the public's attention from political issues. If that is so, then
the print media's coverage of politics as sports during the 1990s has
taken Chomsky's characterization to its logical extreme, with the result
being that the public is, indeed, diverted from the issues behind the
game.

Chomsky's instrumentalist view offers an explanation of why the press
covers politics as a sporting event. Fallows, too, has an explanation:
"Much of today's press acts as if, down deep, they believe that none of
it matters in public life." This indifference, Fallows continues,
manifests itself in "the instinct of reporters to skip past the
consequences of any trend or event and focus instead on how the game was
played."9

The consequences of treating politics as a game, as entertainment, are
severe. In Habermas's view, the press is an important port of call in
the public sphere. When the press turns away from the concerns of
citizens, it closes important access to political life. Without a public
political sphere, where all the policies that affect the populace are
debated and discussed, democracy ceases to have meaning. Fallows agrees:
"A relentless emphasis on the cynical game of politics threatens public
life itself, by implying that the political sphere is mainly an arena in
which ambitious politicians struggle for dominance, rather than a
structure in which citizens can deal with worrisome collective
problems."10

And what's more, I want to add, is that the focus on the game of
politics erects an artificial barrier between citizens and the public
political sphere, fanning the feeling of helplessness, impotence, and
lack of influence over the politics that directly affect their lives.
Focusing on the game of politics exacerbates the citizen's profound
sense that regardless of what he or she does, nothing will change.

In Breaking the News, Fallows argues that the failure of the press to
engage the public in political life underlies much that is wrong with
the relationship between the media and politics in the United States.
The result, Fallows says, is "fatalistic disengagement" of the public
from politics.

Perhaps here an instrumentalist would step in to say that the press has
not failed -- but in fact succeeded in its conspiratorial move to cut
the public off from political power, thereby bolstering its own.

These observations and explanations, poignant as they are, lead me to
ask, on the one hand, how Kellner's theory accounts for the press's
treatment of politics as sports and, on the other hand, if he better
captures its causes and consequences. For, as Kellner himself says,
whether a "theory is useful can be determined by whether it does or does
not illuminate specific phenomena."11

Beyond assuming that media texts are not merely "pure and innocent
entertainment,"12 Kellner has little to say directly about the treatment
of politics as sports. For one thing, Kellner believes media texts are
more complex than mere entertainment. Kellner, no doubt, would reject an
instrumentalist line holding that the media conspire to cover politics
as sports to deliberately divert the public from the substance of the
issues. In fact, despite the treatment of politics as sports, Kellner
holds that "in the political sphere, media images have produced a new
sort of sound-bite politics which places the media at the center of
political life,"13 a view that clashes with Fallows' observation that
the public is fatally disengaged from political life, largely because of
the media's sound-bite politics.

The answer to my question -- how Kellner accounts for the news media's
treatment of politics as sports -- can be found in the chapter on the
1991 war in the Persian Gulf, the chapter which most directly deals with
the news media's coverage of a political event.

Kellner, like Fallows, sees the media covering the war as if it were a
major sporting event. Kellner, however, gives a different explanation
than Fallows. And Kellner adds another element: The media not only
covered the war like a sporting event but became involved in the event
themselves -- as cheerleaders.

"Television," which framed the war as an exciting narrative, Kellner
says, "served primarily as a propaganda apparatus for the multinational
forces arrayed against the Iraqis and as a cheerleader for their every
victory."14 The audience was led to see the war, in Kellner's words, as
the "Super Bowl of wars." Kellner even goes so far as to point out that
"seven Super Bowl [football] players were asked their views of the
war."15

What motivated the news media to cover the war in such a way? Surely it
wasn't for the explanation that Fallows puts forth for the news media
covering politics, more generally, as sports. Surely it was not because
reporters thought that none of really mattered.

Not surprisingly, Kellner's analysis takes a different track. The war
coverage, he says, must seen "within the framework of the political
economy of commercial television."16 Although Kellner acknowledges that
the situation involving the media's coverage of the war was complex, his
dominant argument is that the television networks and the other news
media covered the war with the goal of attracting viewers. "Competition
revolved around presenting the most patriotic, exciting, and
comprehensive coverage," Kellner says.17

Thus, Kellner takes an instrumentalist approach that is almost as direct
as Chomsky's. The only difference lies in the attribution of motivation.
For Chomsky, the media may cover a particular political event positively
because they are acting as the propaganda wing of the government. For
Kellner, it seems, the news media covered the war positively because
they were seeking to make money. But such a view assumes that viewers
already supported the war, an assumption that seems dubious in light of
public reaction to the Vietnam War. Perhaps viewers did support the war
merely because they were backing their country in a conflict, much like
the fans of a sports team would obviously support their team over
another. The Vietnam experience, however, somewhat undermines the force
of this assumption. Why else might the American public back the war?
Kellner's explanation: Through the news media's coverage, "the audience
was mobilized to support every move of the Bush administration and the
Pentagon."18 Kellner goes so far as to say that the news media produced
the popularity of the war as well as the patriotism and "irrational
hysteria" in support of it.19 Kellner's explanation, then, is not only
instrumentalist but circular: The news media backed the war to attract
audience share while they mobilized the support for the war that
provided the motivation to attract viewers by covering the conflict
positively.20

The circularity of Kellner's explanation makes its power suspect. If
Kellner argues in the first instance that the media are covering an
event positively in order to gain audience share on the assumption that
viewers already support the event, then an independent explanation must
be put forth for the audience's support of the event.

But no matter: As Kellner acknowledges, the media's coverage of the
event seemed to have little long-term effect. The success of the war, as
portrayed by the media, did not secure President Bush's reelection. In
fact, the war, Kellner writes, "eventually raised questions concerning
whether he was really an effective president. Its short-term positive
effects also point to the fickleness of audiences in a media-saturated
society, who soon forget the big events of the previous year."21 Perhaps
none of it really matters politically to the public -- because it
doesn't matter politically to the news media.





5 Corporate Media Culture
=========================

**F**act: Most of America's newspapers as well as magazines, TV and
radio stations, and film production companies are owned by fewer than 15
major corporations. Kellner, to his credit, assumes that American
culture, including media culture, is predominantly commercial. Such an
assumption begs to be followed by at least a theoretical examination of
the economic relations underlying commercial culture. Indeed, a powerful
theory of the media will explain the cultural and political consequences
of the monopoly ownership of the media. To what extent, then, does
Kellner's theory account for the role of the corporation in generating
media culture?

As a start, Kellner, adopting the theoretical apparatus of the Frankfurt
school, views media as organized on the model of mass production. But
Kellner also sees the shortcomings of applying an industrial model
emphasizing the state to a postindustrial age increasingly dominated by
giant corporations -- insights which enable him to improve on the
Frankfurt school's model in two ways. First, he acknowledges the
economic structural changes that have resulted in "transnational
corporations replacing the nation-state as arbitrators of production."22
Second, Kellner recognizes that to view media culture as beholden to the
laws of industrial production in an age of postindustrialism would fail
to take into account the rapid advances in technology, often initiated
by large corporations, that are propelling Western societies beyond the
industrial model.

Yet, given the degree of corporate involvement in media culture and
Kellner's acknowledgements of commercial culture and of corporations as
the arbiters of production, I would have expected him to more thoroughly
explore the influence of corporations upon media culture and, in turn,
democracy. This Kellner does not do. He, no doubt, has other goals in
mind. But by failing to explicitly deal with corporate influence on
media culture and democracy, he lessens the input into his theory --
and, as a result, reduces the scope of his theory's reach. A theory that
attempts to explain the media's role in a democratic society must
address the totality of significant factors that characterize the media.
The economic aspects of media culture, which, with the increases in
monopolization and market concentration that characterize a maturing
capitalism, warrant explicit, detailed attention, especially when the
media monopoly can be seen, as Mark Crispin Miller has written in The
Nation, as the "true causes" of the "terminal inanity of U.S. politics,"
an affliction that undermines participatory democracy.23 And the
importance of such a study becomes still more pressing when America is
seen, in the words of one cultural critic, not as a culture, but as an
economy.





6 The Place of Resistance in a Corporate Media Culture
======================================================

**P**articipatory democracy in a media culture will thrive only if the
mass of media consumers find within their cultural artifacts the means
to take political action and partake in the political system, which is
itself mediated by the media. From the normative perspective of
progressive political activism, Kellner's failure to delve more
thoroughly into the influence of the media monopoly upon participatory
democracy leaves an important question unanswered: Given that most media
are owned and controlled by corporations, how can readers and viewers
find the germ of resistance?

One answer, of course, is the independent or alternative press, an
answer which is the cornerstone of resistance for such instrumentalists
as Chomsky. Yet the independent media -- mostly small cable channels,
college radio stations, and weekly newspapers -- comprise but a small
portion of American media culture, vastly limiting their potential as
vessels for resistance. The motivation for resistance must be found
within the mainstream media. The question stands.

Kellner supplies an answer: Moments of resistance, he says, can be
gleaned from within most media texts, even those that explicitly carry
conservative messages, by reading them against their ideological grain.
The complexity of media artifacts also allows them to contain
contradictory messages wherein resistance can be found.

But is it reasonable to expect the typical television watcher or
newspaper reader, untutored in the intricacies of media culture, to find
moments of resistance in media artifacts without being somehow trained
to do so? The answer, it seems, is no. Until the critical media pedagogy
that Kellner advocates becomes common curriculum in American education,
what is needed for the project of resistance to be meaningful and
successful is a way in which typical citizens, not just deconstruction
workers or cultural studies practitioners, can find moments of
resistance in media.

Assuming, though, that the average media user detects moments of
resistance in, say, a newspaper article, how can he or she use it for
social and political action? But before we ask how such moments of
resistance can be used, it seems reasonable to ask whether they can be
used at all: Can they serve as a point of departure for social action?
Can the mere identification of a theme of resistance give a viewer an
advantageous place in the struggle against oppression?

At least one cultural theorist argues the contrary. The passive viewer,
the outside observer, cannot find his place in the active struggle
against oppression from the starting point of consumption. Rather -- at
least when action is required -- the observer must somehow become a
participant in the production of the cultural artifact to become a
meaningful force for change. This is the view of Walter Benjamin. He
writes: "The place of the intellectual in the class struggle can be
identified, or, better, chosen, only on the basis of his position in the
process of production."24

All is not lost. Benjamin, just as he denies the usefulness of the
viewer's passive resistance, so too leaves an opening through which
Kellner's insistence on the decoding for resistance can be salvaged. The
cultural artifact, Benjamin argues, produces the means to resist
oppression only to the extent that it can turn viewers into producers.
"And this apparatus is better the more consumers it is able to turn into
producers -- that is, readers or spectators into collaborators."25

Kellner's diagnostic critique becomes the apparatus that enables a
consumer to find the wherewithal to become a producer in a time when the
corporate-controlled media provides little direct inspiration for those
seeking to become producers.

Kellner's theory of resistance, supplemented by Benjamin's call for
action, must now cross its toughest barrier: How can the individual (or
a group of them) carry out his or her intention to become a producer
when most of the distribution channels are owned and guarded by
corporations?

Kellner's view responds, in a straightforward way, to this question by
showing in such chapters as "Black Voices from Spike Lee to Rap" that
corporations will open their channels to dissident producers if there is
enough of an audience for their work to ensure profits for the
corporation funding the film. The success of such film makers as Spike
Lee and Michael Moore, the producer of Roger & Me, an attack on General
Motors, demonstrates that resistance -- even against the corporation
itself -- is possible within an industry controlled by corporations.
Moore, in an article in The Nation, not only lends credence to Kellner's
theoretical position that there are ambivalent and oppositional
movements within media culture but also describes how they can arise.
Moore says: "If you are going to attack a big bad corporation in your
film, it will help to have another big bad corporation in your
corner."26 Thus, it seems that the media distributed by corporations are
not directed toward collusive ends, dispelling the instrumentalist
hypothesis.

Kellner also articulates a strong implicit theoretical response to the
question of how active resistance through production is possible in
media governed by corporations. Media culture artifacts, on Kellner's
view, necessarily contain representations of all oppositional tendencies
within society. Even though the artifacts are distributed by
corporations, the artifacts are produced by individuals or teams of
them, and each artifact embodies each producer's fears, fantasies,
hopes, or desires.

To recap this section, Kellner's theory sufficiently and economically
accounts for resistance in the form of production, but seems to falter
in showing how consumers of media can act on the themes of resistance
they detect in media artifacts, leaving unanswered how consumers'
intentions to resist, outside of becoming producers themselves, can
advance participatory democracy.

Just because the fact that resistance is possible in the realm of
production does not necessarily entail that it will have a democratizing
effect
<img src="/images/bkhorkhe.gif" align="right" />
upon consumers. For built into the capitalist system, say Horkheimer and
Adorno, is an anti-resistance mechanism that works by way of onslaught:
the individual is barraged by a constant volley of mind-numbing
information, leaving him no time to even consider resisting. "What is
decisive today is ... the necessity inherent in the system not to leave
the customer alone, not for a moment to allow him any suspicion that
resistance is possible."27 The volley of information, images, and sounds
has only worsened since the time when Horkheimer and Adorno were
writing, prompting calls that an era of postmodernism has arrived. "The
need which might resist central control," say Horkheimer and Adorno,
"has already been suppressed by the control of the individual
consciousness,"28 a process that leads to the next section of my
discussion: the homogeneous perspective propagated by the news media.





7 Uniformity of Perspective
===========================

**T**he products manufactured and brought to market by the media form
more than just a postmodern collage of images, words, and sounds. And
they are more than mere ideologies, however superficial. They are a
perspective -- not many but one: A uniform perspective that radically
influences how we perceive the world, what we describe as "reality,"
what we call "knowledge," how we think, and what we think about.
Horkheimer and Adorno, already identifying the uniformity of perspective
in the 1940s, called it an "ever-changing sameness." Walter Benjamin,
writing even earlier than Horkheimer and Adorno, noted the profound
effect a uniform perspective of the media could have on its consumers.
"During long periods of history," he writes in Illuminations29, "the
mode of human sense perception changes with humanity's entire mode of
existence." Since the first half of the century, the picture has only
gotten worse. Herber I. Schiller calls the 1990s version of media's
uniform perspective "packaged consciousness."30

In light of these observations, it seems reasonable to ask a theory of
media culture to explain how the uniformity of perspective in the
deliverance of the news has affected the way people think and act, and
more importantly, the way people participate in democracy.

Kellner does not answer these questions directly. In fact, contrary to
the observations and strong intuitions of such critics quoted above and,
no doubt, at least some empirical evidence, Kellner does not hold that
the media's perspective is uniform. Instead, Kellner says, "the texts of
media culture," which presumably include the news media, "incorporate a
variety of discourses [and] ideological positions ... which rarely
coalesce into a pure and coherent ideological position."31 Kellner's
general characterization of the media, then, runs counter to the
uniformity of perspective view.

Yet Kellner does note that "certain media texts advance specific
ideological positions." Thus, Kellner's position seems to be that
although particular media texts may contain a particular position or be
limited by a single perspective, the totality of media culture contains
a multiplicity of positions, implying a multiplicity of perspectives.

I would like to examine the rationale for Kellner's position with
respect to an important event: the 1991 war between the United States
and Iraq in the Persian Gulf region. Because the media's coverage of the
war was performed by at least four major networks and many major
newspapers and wire services, it should not be taken as a single text,
and thus should not be subject to Kellner's caveat that a particular
text can take a particular position based on a singular perspective.
Indeed, coverage of the war in the Persian Gulf should be taken instead
as a microcosmic example of how the news media function as a cultural
entity. As such, if Kellner's position is accurate, the news media would
have covered the war from a variety of perspectives and their media
texts would have contained a variety of discourses and ideological
positions.

Kellner, however, makes the mistake of treating coverage of the war as a
single cultural text -- an untenable position given the number of
networks and newspapers covering the war.

At any rate, to reinforce my argument that Kellner's misgivings about a
uniformity of perspective are misguided, I will briefly examine chapter
6 of Kellner's Media Culture: "Reading the Gulf War:
Production/Text/Reception."

In "Reading the Gulf War," Kellner quickly finds himself in trouble on
several fronts, largely because he puts forth a web of contradictory
statements. First, he assumes an instrumentalist perspective in his
analysis of the news media -- a perspective he derided in earlier
chapters of the book, producing within his theory an internal
theoretical inconsistency. In an earlier chapter, for instance, Kellner
writes that he sees "media culture as contested terrain reproducing on
the cultural level the fundamental conflicts within society rather than
an instrument of domination."32 Yet, at the beginning of chapter 6,
Kellner writes: "The mainstream media in the United States and elsewhere
tended to be a compliant vehicle for the government strategy to
manipulate the public, thereby imperiling democracy which requires
informed citizens ... and a free and vigorous critical media"33 and that
"the political economy of the media in the United States facilitated the
manufacturing of consent for U.S. government policies."34

Later in the same chapter, however, Kellner clarifies the above
statement: "Although the mainstream media served as propaganda conduits
for<img src="/images/bknmmanu.gif" align="right" />
the U.S. government and military, in my interpretation, the media are
not propaganda instruments per se for the state as some argue (Herman
and Chomsky 1988; Chomsky 1989)." The view of Chomsky and Herman, as
explicated in their 1988 book Manufacturing Consent: The Political
Economy of the Mass
Media,
however, is exactly the position that Kellner takes toward the media's
coverage of the Gulf war: that "the political economy of the media in
the United States facilitated the manufacturing of consent for U.S.
government policies."

As he continues to back pedal on his earlier statement, Kellner
introduces an ad hoc explanation that also conflicts with his earlier
characterizations of the media and, more importantly, fails to
adequately account for the influence of the media:

"Rather, one should see the major commercial networks primarily as money
machines seeking ratings and profits. If the war is popular, then in
pursuit of ratings the networks will provide a positive picture of the
war, eliminating discordant voices, as happened in the Persian Gulf War.
Moreover, General Electric and RCA, which own NBC, are major military
contractors who will benefit tremendously from a successful war, and NBC
dutifully served as a Pentagon propaganda organ from beginning to end of
the war."35

Even within this excerpt, Kellner contradicts himself: He first says,
taking a Frankfurt School approach, that the networks are money machines
seeking ratings from presenting a positive picture of the war to an
enthusiastic audience. Next, however, he points out, taking a
instrumentalist approach, that NBC, owned by General Electric, served as
a propaganda machine for the Pentagon, implying that the network
positively covered the war to help the corporate father rather than to
meet the expectations of an enthusiastic public.

Other aspects of Kellner's explanation are circular. First, he says that
the media "utilized images and discourse of the crisis and then the war
to mobilize consent and support for the U.S. military intervention."36
But later in the chapter he says, as quoted above, that the networks
presented a positive picture of the war to boost their ratings before a
war-supporting public. Thus, according to Kellner's analysis, the media
both mobilized the public's support of the war with positive coverage
and presented positive coverage of it because the public supported it.

Let me sum up these observations by returning to the question of a
uniform perspective. First, recall that I established the media's
coverage of the Gulf war to be not a single media text, as Kellner
claims, but many texts that together form a microcosmic example of the
news media's behavior. Now, if Kellner is right in seeing the texts of
media culture as reproducing the fundamental conflicts within society,
either there was no conflict within society over the war in the gulf, a
position that is clearly not the case, as Kellner himself acknowledges;
or the media acted, as they usually do, in unison, confirming the
uniformity of perspective view; or the media acted in unison but that
such collusion was a particular exception, putting the burden on Kellner
to put forth a strong explanation of how all or nearly all the media
involved could have acted in complicity despite their diversity in
numbers and medium.

Indeed, in light of my original assumption that a theory of media
culture should explain how the media's uniform perspective influences
how people think and act, Kellner, aside from the internal inconsistency
of his many views, holds in part that the media's uniformity of
perspective, in the case of the Persian Gulf war, is produced by the
majority's support of the war. Such an explanation, taken to its logical
extremes, fails to account for the media's uniformity of perspective in
covering the spectrum of political issues.

Moreover and more generally, Kellner's position that the media "are
extremely cautious in going against public opinion"37 conflicts with
polls that show people feeling powerless over politics, feelings of
powerlessness that stem at least in part from the news media. Ralph
Nader, who has been studying effects of news coverage on citizen
attitudes, sees "a huge collective demoralization for the people who are
masochistic enough to watch TV."38

Kellner's explanation also has some rather odd implications for
participatory democracy. If Kellner's assumption that the media pander
to the majority of their viewers' and readers' political enthusiasms to
gain audience share is true, then the media, rather than influencing the
political thoughts of the people, reflect them -- meaning that the
content of the media is voted in, so to speak, just as politicians are
voted into office. Under such a view, the normative assertions made by
Kellner that the media system must be democratized39 are rendered moot
-- for the media is already a democracy, its content decided largely by
popular vote.

Such an analysis, of course, is taking Kellner's assumption to rather
extreme conclusions. But the analysis does, I think, illustrate some of
the problems that surface as a result of Kellner's seemingly willy-nilly
adoption of various explanations. Kellner's theory, as his chapter on
the Gulf war demonstrates, contains an array of explanations, some
contradictory, of the media's role within a democratic society. Indeed,
analyzing all the links among his theory's explanations of the
relationship between media, culture, and democracy can quickly become
messy, largely because he so generously borrows as needed from audience
reception theories, instrumentalism, critical theory, and so forth, even
when such explanations contain conflicting presuppositions or lead to
disparate conclusions. There is, however, a reason for this, and it is a
reason that, I believe, is also detrimental to Kellner's theory.





8 The Ill-Hewn Net
==================

**K**ellner's theory, it seems, is rather loosely scattered about;
repetitions notwithstanding, he's all over the place. He posits a new
tenet or appropriates an established one from another theory for nearly
every fact of media culture. In fact, it seems as if his approach to
media culture is not so much a theory as an ill-hewn, overly large net.
His theory is ill-hewn in that it borrows almost willy-nilly from other
theories whenever convenient, sometimes regardless of whether the
doctrine contrasts with earlier ones that Kellner has laid out or
borrowed from others. It is overly large in that it uses too much
machinery to explain too few facts.

Ultimately, a theory of the media must move beyond the media, for the
media are merely a reflection, an embodiment, of the dominant nature and
conditions of a cultural epoch. Thus, a theory of the media must not
only describe and explain the working of the media, but also make the
leap into explaining the substance of the culture itself. In the end, an
analysis of a culture's media must be an analysis of that culture
itself. The easily accessible cultural artifacts of media provide a
valuable window into a culture's essence, as Siegfried Kracauer points
out: "The surface-level expressions ... by virtue of their unconscious
nature, provide unmediated access to the fundamental substance of the
state of things."40

Does Kellner make this leap? Does he take a step back, look at media,
and ask to what extent his theory sheds a clearer light on the
fundamental conditions underlying late 20th-century American culture?
Yes, this Kellner does, and his attempt to get at culture through media,
to in fact combine the two under the rubric "media culture," is a
well-intentioned, and, to a certain extent, successful venture.

Kellner's theory of the media, however, succeeds in explaining only a
limited range of American culture and only by putting forth a great deal
of explanatory machinery. Considering the vast array of data about the
media, Kellner overly limits the input of data into his theory. The
result, accordingly, is that the output of his theory accounts for only
a limited quadrant of the media's cultural field and political
influence. When pressed to account for additional important facts of
media culture that lie beyond the limited range of data that Kellner
surveys, his theory fails to provide the scope and depth that I would
expect of a theory with so much explanatory apparatus.





9 Notes
=======

1. Douglas Kellner, Media Culture: Cultural Studies, Identity and
Politics Between the Modern and the
Postmodern
(London: Routledge, 1995), 10.

2. Ibid. 1.

3. Ben Bagdikian, The Media
Monopoly,
4th Edition (Boston: Beacon Press, 1992), ix.

4. Kellner, Media Culture, 2-3.

5. Kellner, Media Culture, 1.

6. Ibid. 2.

7. Jurgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere:
An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger
with Frederick Lawrence (Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1989),
206.

8. James Fallows, Breaking the News: How the Media Undermine American
Democracy
(New York: Pantheon, 1996), 160.

9. Ibid. 161. Italics in the original.

10. Ibid. 31.

11. Kellner, Media Culture, 48.

12. Ibid. 4.

13. Ibid. 18.

14. Ibid. 210.

15. Ibid. 211.

16. Ibid. 4.

17. Ibid. 211.

18. Ibid. 211.

19. Ibid. 223.

20. I address this -- and its implications for democracy -- in greater
detail below. See my section on Uniformity of Perspective.

21. Ibid. 226.

22. Kellner, Media Culture, 17-18.

23. Mark Crispin Miller, "Free the Media," The Nation (June 3, 1996),
10.

24. Walter Benjamin, Reflections, ed. Peter Demetz, trans. Edmund
Jephcott (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), 228.

25. Ibid. 233.

26. Michael Moore, "The Movies & Me," The Nation (Nov. 4, 1996), 10.

27. Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, Dialectic of
Enlightenment,
trans. John Cumming (New York: Continuum, 1995), 141.

28. Ibid. 121.

29. Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry
Zohn (New York: Schocken Books, 1969), 222.

30. Herber I. Schiller, "On That Chart," The Nation (June 3, 1996), 16.

31. Herber I. Schiller, "On That Chart," The Nation (June 3, 1996), 16.

32. Ibid. 101-102.

33. Ibid. 198.

34. Ibid. 199.

35. Ibid. 212-213.

36. Ibid. 199.

37. Ibid. 201.

38. Quoted in Fallows, Breaking the News, 200.

39. See, for example, Kellner, Media Culture, 226.

40. Siegfried Kracauer, The Mass Ornament: Weimar Essays, trans. and
ed. Thomas Y. Levin (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press,
1995), 75.






