---
description: |
    Using French Social Thought for Media Criticism. Foucault, Althusser and
    Roland Barthes used for a critical analysis of the news media.
keywords: |
    media theory, postmodernism, newspapers, criticism, media, journalism,
    theory, culture, advertising, film, press, media criticism, social
    theory, sociology, Foucault, Barthes, Althusser, French Social Thought,
    semiology, discourse analysis
title: Using French Social Thought for Media Criticism
---



**By Steve Hoenisch**\
Last updated on November 21, 2005\
Copyright 1996-2017 [www.Criticism.Com](http://www.criticism.com/)\



1 MEDIA CULTURE
===================



In an era when the media have grown to be one of the most dominant forms
of culture in North American -- so dominant, in fact, that the they can
now be seen as the pinnacle of commercial culture -- an explanatory
theory of the media becomes paramount. Yet considering the intimate
relationship between society and media and that, for many, the media
have become their culture -- producing a media culture -- a theory that
views the media outside the context of culture will be afflicted with
myopia. Thus, for completeness, a theory of the media requires a firm
connection to culture in its every step.





While an adequate theory of media culture, in our era, is of deep
significance, it would nevertheless lack a fundamental connection to
more profound aspects of life that, for me, go beyond liberalism --
freedom from oppression, justice, equality, and general welfare --
without being tied to the political system that should aim to ensure
such liberties.





While keeping such liberties in view, a social theory, when directed
toward the mass media, should account for at least the following
predominant facts, which characterize the intersection of culture and
media in American society: the treatment of politics as entertainment or
sport; the focus of image over substance; the uniformity of perspective
from which the mass media cover the news; the media's seemingly vast
political power, especially in light of its proclamation of objectivity;
the historical basis for the formulation of a media culture and the
history behind the media's acquisition of power over the political
system.





There are also relationships, like those of agency, that a theory of the
media should be able to explain: How can an individual influence the
mass media, and how are individuals' ideologies influenced by the media.
How is resistance possible, either as a passive viewer or as an active
producer, in the climate of near-monopoly ownership of the U.S. media by
about 10 corporations1, since, as Roland Barthes says, "all domination
begins by prohibiting language."2 The monopoly ownership of the media
allows corporations to do just that in the area where forceful
oppositional discourse is most desperately needed.





And there are questions of meaning that must be answered: Does a media
artifact contain singular or multiple meanings? How do viewers draw
meaning from media texts and images? Can not viewers project their own
meaning into media artifacts? Who constructs meaning, the individual or
the institution? The list goes on.





And finally: Why do so many people, including myself, watch so much bad
television and consume so much rotten media, even when we know it is
bad.





All these issues cannot be addressed here, but with them in mind, this
essay examines the application of three strains of French social thought
-- structural Marxism, semiology, and postmodernism -- to analyzing the
mass media and their relations to culture and society. Ultimately, I
seek to assess the explanatory power of Althusser's structural Marxism,
Barthes's semiology, and Foucault's postmodernism when applied to the
mass media.





There are, of course, several representatives of structural Marxism,
semiology and postmodernism, and each of the schools has been formally
applied to the media. Space, however, forbids an analysis of all three
schools' representatives. It also forbids an examination of formal mass
media models built upon the work of the schools' primary theorists.
Thus, my focus will be on the theoretical founders of each school, and
primarily on only one representative from each. I will examine Louis
Althusser's structural Marxism; Roland Barthes's semiology, complemented
at the margins by Baudrillard's theory; and Michel Foucault's
postmodernism, with some references to Jacques Derrida's views.





With a focus on these authors, this essay will broadly delineate the
theoretical approaches of the three schools in explaining the role of
the mass media in society. As I proceed, I will also enumerate several
strengths and weaknesses of each theory and make some comparisons among
them.





The last section of the essay will ask which theory, in sum, best
accounts for some of the important characteristics of the mass media in
relation to culture and the social and political system.





Before proceeding, I would like to make a general disclaimer: This
essay, with the goals set out above, could easily constitute a book.
Thus, for the sake of brevity, many possible angles, perspectives,
questions and answers -- including some of those mentioned above -- will
not be addressed or pursued.





1.1 A Word about "Media"




The term "mass media" includes television, film, radio, the Internet,
newspapers, books, advertising, music, all forms of news, the covers of
compact disks, the backs of cereal boxes. I often use the word "media"
as shorthand for mass media.





However, the term "media," used alone, carries a wider meaning for me,
including not only all forms of mass media and telecommunications but
also any image or object given the weight of meaning in society. Thus,
under "media" I would subsume such obvious forms as fashion but such
less obvious forms as the packaging of ordinary products and the look of
automobiles and other stylized products. That is, "media" includes any
medium *or object* used to communicate a message or a meaning.



















2 THE THEORIES
==================



This section defines and outlines in broad strokes the theoretical
approaches of Althusser's structural Marxism, Barthes's semiology, and
Foucault's postmodernism to explaining the role of the mass media in
society. In my view, Althusser's theorizing is the most complex, and
thus I will attempt to render it most simply. Barthes and Foucault's
theories will receive a more playful, less methodical description. When
it comes to Foucault's postmodernism especially, the bounds of
interpretation are, in my view, more lenient.





## 2.1 Althusser and Ideology




In relation to the mass media, two of the key concepts of structural
Marxism are Althusser's rejection of the classical base-superstructure
model and his break with viewing the media strictly as a means of
production that creates false consciousness. Yet, when his theory is
used to analyze the mass media, it rests on the notion of ideology,
including the view that an individual is constituted by such pre-given
structures as language and, in America especially, media culture. As
such, Althusser's Marxism is structural because it rejects the
Hegel-inspired essentialism that led on the one hand to viewing economic
relations as the essence of society and on the other hand to seeing
social developments as expressive of human nature. Similarly, each
individual's subjectivity, in Althusser's view, is constituted by
ideology, the mediating factor between the individual and the world. In
this way, a structuralist line runs through much of Althusser's thought;
people and categories, including economic ones, exist in a "\`pre-given'
complex structured whole."3 Below I expand on these concepts and their
place within Althusser's thought as well as their relation to an
analysis of the mass media.





In classical Marxism, the economic base of society determines the
superstructure; that is, economic relations determine all social,
cultural and political phenomena, which includes everything from
ideology and political consciousness to media culture.





Althusser's structural Marxism, however, breaks from this strict
base-superstructure model by arguing for "the relative autonomy of the
superstructure with respect to the base ... \[and\] the reciprocal
action of the superstructure on the base."4 Such a view, then, breaks
from classical Marxist view that the economic base of commercial media
organizations primarily determines the content of the material they
produce. Instead, Althusser points the way to conceptualizing
ideological practices like the media as relatively autonomous from
economic determination, thereby accounting for the possibility of
diverse values and viewpoints in the commercial media and for
oppositional readings by their audiences.





Some schools of Marxism also see the media strictly as a means of
production, the function of which is to produce "false consciousness" in
the working class. Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, for instance,
sees the mass media as a "culture industry" producing "mass deception."5
Such a characterization of the media can in turn lead to conceiving of
media products as expressions of ruling-class values, a view that
ignores the diversity of values within both the ruling class and the
media. In the United States, for example, the right maintains the mass
media are overwhelmingly liberal, whereas the left contends that they
are conservative. Both of these views exist side by side in the ruling
class of mainline republicans and democrats. Conceiving of the media
merely as producers of false consciousness also disallows the audience's
potential to read media artifacts oppositionally, for media artifacts,
on at least one theorist's view, necessarily contain representations of
all oppositional tendencies within society.6





Althusser, however, rejects the notion of false consciousness,
emphasizing instead that people interact with the world through
ideology, which can itself be as much a determining force as the
economic base. Ideology is "the \`lived' relation between men and their
world."7 For Althusser, then, the mass media are ideology. Althusser
goes on to distinguish ideology from science through knowledge: In
science, knowledge predominates, whereas the "pracitico-social
predominates" in ideology.8





By emphasizing ideology over means of production, Althusser allows for
oppositional readings of the mass media as well as opening the way for a
diversity of viewpoints in the media. "As Marx says," Althusser writes,
"it is in ideology that men \`become conscious' of their class conflict
and \`fight it out.'"9 As such, it can be through reading and viewing
the media that people become conscious of their class status. And
through production of media, people may fight the dominant capitalist
class, though it remains unclear in Althusser's view how they can do
this in the United States when nearly all the commercial media outlets
are own by a small number of large corporations. At any rate, the focus
on ideology lies not only at the center of Althusser's theory as
directed toward the mass media, but also stands as one its strong
points.





Ideology also functions to constitute individuals as subjects.
Individuals get their social identities primarily through such
"ideological state apparatuses" as the mass media.10 Indeed, according
to Robert Lapsley and Michael Westlake's 1988 book Film Theory: An
Introduction, it is through such apparatuses as the mass media that
people obtain not only a sense of identity but also an understanding of
reality. That is, ideology, even though it has relative autonomy, serves
to recast people as subjects, leading them to view themselves as
self-determining agents when they are in fact shaped by pre-given
ideological processes.





### 2.1.1 Althusser's Strengths and Weaknesses



Some strengths and weaknesses of Althusser's structural Marxism as
applied to the media, beyond those mentioned above, include the
following:





* It discounts the free agency of individuals both in and outside the
media industries to explicitly and directly influence the content of the
mass media.





* Since ideological forms such as the media contribute to reproducing
the existing system, Althusser's theory bumps up against functionalism,
opening itself up to many the criticisms that have been aimed at that
theory.





* In Althusser's theory, mass media texts, along with other ideological
apparatuses, lead people to develop not only a sense of personal reality
but also an understanding of reality. The problem here, however, is that
such a view fails to account for the possibility of an individual
projecting his or her own meaning into a media text.





This weakness coexists with what I see as another: Althusser's
anti-humanism. He seems to reject that the individual is a
self-conscious, autonomous being whose actions could be explained in
terms of personal beliefs or intentions. As such, Althusser's theory
fails to explain how an individual can appropriate media texts and
images for his or her own ends independent of influences by the dominant
ideology.





On the other hand, a central strength of Althusser's theory, especially
in contrast to classical Marxism, is summed up by Stewart Hall.
Structural Marxism dodges a





> "general and wide-ranging criticism advanced against classical marxism itself: its rigid structural determinacy, its reductionism of two
 varieties -- class and economic; its way of conceptualizing the social
 formation itself. Marx's model of ideology has been criticized because
 it did not conceptualize the social formation as a determinate complex
 formation, composed of different practices, but as a simple (or, as
 Althusser called it in For Marx and Reading Capital, an \`expressive')
 structure. By this Althusser meant that one practice -- \`the
 economic' -- determines in a direct manner all others, and each effect
 is simply and simultaneously reproduced correspondingly (i.e.,
 \`expressed') on all other levels."11





However, the lack of emphasis on economic determination may also lead to
a weakness when Althusser's theory is applied to the climate of media
culture in the United States, where nearly all the mass media are owned
by a few conglomerates. This media monopoly creates a uniformity of
perspective that contains few moments of diversity outside those imposed
by the oppositional readings of individuals. Classical Marxism's
emphasis on the economic base, which highlights ownership and control of
the media, perhaps better explains the current status of the mass media
in the United States -- or at least helps focus an analyst on a crucial
issue.









## 2.2 Roland Barthes's Semiology




Roland Barthes's semiology finds it foundation in the structural
linguistic theory of Ferdinand de Saussure, who posited an abstract
notion known as *langue* to explain the system of language.
<img src="../images/0374521603.gif" align="right" />





Central to Saussure's theory is the sign, which is in langue. The sign
emerges at the conjunction of the signified and the signifier, both of
which are in *parole,* or a language's concrete properties. In
Saussurean linguistics, the signifier is the speech sound, and the
signified is the concept or idea in the mind of the speaker. The sign is
the entity that brings the two together, and it gains its meaning only
in relation or opposition to other signs in the system. Hence the
meaning of any sign is not only a social convention but also an
arbitrary construction. Barthes expands Saussure's theory to the domain
of culture, analyzing how objects and media function as signs in the
social system. Barthes is particularly interested in the connotation, as
opposed to denotation, of social signs; that is, their secondary
meaning. His analyses of objects, media and other signs often seek to
debunk the myths, or false representations, that surround them and
appear natural. Such myths are used to construct an illusory social
reality that distorts society's actual structures of power and
reinforces the capitalist ideology. Barthes's semiology, then, seeks to
expose these myths for what they are by analyzing the sign and its
relation to other signs in the social system. For Barthes, "a photograph
will be a kind of speech for us in the same way as a newspaper article;
even objects will become speech, if they mean something."12





The expansion of Saussure's linguistic theory to the domain of culture
centers on Barthes's notion that there are, in effect, two semiological
systems. The first, called by Barthes the language-object, is the system
of language, image, or other modes of representation; in themselves,
they can contain myths. The second, called the metalanguage, is a layer
of myth behind the first "in which one speaks about the first" level and
only needs "to know its total term, or global sign, and only inasmuch as
this term lends itself to myth."13 Myth, that is, is a "second-order
semiological system"14 that contains, like the first system, the
tri-dimensional pattern of signifier, signified, and sign.
<img src="../images/0374521506.gif" align="right" />





Barthes provides an example. A photograph shows a black man in a French
uniform saluting what Barthes says is probably the French flag. This is
the first-level meaning of the picture, what can be seen as its
denotation. The second-level meaning of the picture is its connotation,
which contains a myth: "That France is a great Empire, that all her
sons, without any colour discrimination, faithfully serve under her
flag, and that there is no better answer to the detractors of an alleged
colonialism than the zeal shown by this Negro in serving his so-called
oppressors."15





Barthes's example is important because it is taken from a magazine,
*Paris-Match*. Thus Barthes's semiology has a powerful relation to the
media; it is, in fact, a theory constructed for analyzing the media and
the products of a capitalistic society.





### 2.2.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Semiology



Thus, semiology is, in essence, a theory of media and other signs with
cultural meaning. It is, more than anything else, a theory of how
products, objects, images and texts, whether literary or popular, derive
their meanings. One of the great strengths of the semiological approach,
then, in contrast to Althusser's theory, is that it provides a direct,
explicit method for decoding the images, objects, and words that appear
in the media.





Other strengths of Barthes's semiology stem from his use of Saussurean
linguistics. For instance, the meanings of such cultural signs as media
images, seen as "natural" by viewers, are revealed as social
conventions, as arbitrary constructions, which are often fabricated by
one class -- the bourgeoisie in Mythologies -- to dominate or deceive
another. Because these meanings appear to be natural, Barthes says, "the
myth consumer takes the signification for a system of facts: myth is
read as a factual system, whereas it is but a semiological system."16





Yet the same grounding in Saussurean linguistics that gives Barthes's
semiology its power to reveal seemingly natural meanings as socially
constructed myths by viewing them as signs in a synchronic, or static,
system also produces a major weakness: It may forego taking into account
important historical, or diachronic, aspects of cultural signs in their
social systems, which have been constructed *historically.* In other
words, semiology, when applied to such cultural artifacts as the media,
fails to adequately take history into account. This weakness stands in
stark contrast to the strengths of a historically grounded theory, like
Althusser's Marxism.





Another strength in Barthes's writings is that he has an explanation for
a befuddling recurrence: Why so many people watch so much bad television
even when they know it is awful. Barthes's answer: pleasure. He
elaborates thus:





> "If I judge a text according to pleasure, I cannot go on to say: this
 one is good, that bad. No awards, no \`critique," for this always
 implies a tactical aim, a social usage, and frequently an extenuating
 image-reservoir."17





And, more poignantly:


> "it is intermittence, as psychoanalysis has so rightly stated, which
 is erotic: the intermittence \[for example\] of skin flashing between
 two articles of clothing (trousers and sweater), between two edges
 (the open-necked shirt, the glove and the sleeve); it is this flash
 itself which seduces, or rather: the stage of an
 appearance-as-disappearance."18





Unfortunately, however, semiological analysis is stained by a number of
disadvantages, especially when directed away from the media and onto
other features of the world:





* It generalizes -- and at times overgeneralizes -- about all media's
content, and perhaps about all of society's, too.





* It is a reductionist approach that subsumes everything under the sign,
concealing for instance the role of such actors and free agents as
journalists, editors, and managers in producing media.





* Combining both of the above objections, semiology often attempts to
assign a singular, over-arching meaning to a sign, a practice that
Derrida rejects through his notion of diffErance. Barthes writes, as
noted above, that the semiologist only needs "to know its total term, or
global sign, and only inasmuch as this term lends itself to myth." But
how can one know that there is a single meaning or a "global sign"
instead of many meanings lurking behind the first-order representations.





Likewise with the notion of myth: Who is to say what constitutes the
myth? Barthes writes, also as noted above, that "even objects will
become speech, if they mean something." But who is to say *if* they mean
something, or *what* they mean for that matter. An object can easily
come to have meanings that change with the subject viewing it, a
possibility which clashes with Barthes's belief that behind the
first-order representation lies a myth in the form of a "total term" or
"global sign." The theory crumbles into subjectivity.





Yet Barthes, to his credit, realizes this, and moves to call it not
subjectivity but individuality:


> Whenever I attempt to \`analyze' a text which has given me pleasure,
 it is not my \`subjectivity' I encounter but my \`individuality,' the
 given which makes my body separate from other bodies and appropriates
 its suffering or its pleasure: it is my body of bliss I encounter. And
 this body of bliss is also my historical subject; for it is at the
 conclusion of a very complex process of biographical, historical,
 sociological, neurotic elements ... that I control the contradictory
 interplay of (cultural) pleasure and (noncultural) bliss, and that I
 write myself as a subject ..."19





This except, however, is also important on another level: By emphasizing
both individual subject and author it distinguishes Barthes's theory
from convictions expounded by Foucault, toward whose postmodern theory
Barthes drifts ever closer in The Pleasure of the Text as he uses, for
instance, more quotations from Nietzsche than in some of his earlier
works.





* Semiology also abstracts images and texts into the realm of *langue,*
thereby removing them from the concrete world and, some argue, the realm
of objective science.





* Similarly, it locks the semiologist into a technical frame of analysis
that can at times make the method a substitute for reality. Or worse:
Some semiotic analyses are presented as if they are "scientific"
accounts of meaning rather than subjective ones.





* And, perhaps worst of all, semiology, in contrast to other forms of
structuralism, does not allow for content hidden behind the signs of the
media. Barthes, in Mythologies, writes that "however paradoxical it may
seem, *myth hides nothing:* its function is to distort, not to make
disappear."20 In contrast to psychoanalytic theories of meaning, "there
is no latency of the concept in relation to form: there is no need of an
unconscious in order to explain myth."21





This is a difficult position to justify, however, especially in light of
Saussure's initial insight that "the sign always to some extent eludes
control by the will, whether of the individual or of society: that is
its essential nature."22 Saussure meant not only linguistic signs but
social ones, too: common objects, products, things. Saussure, that is,
believed there could be unconscious or unmotivated meanings behind
signs. Barthes's theory seems to trap him into assuming that there is
always intention or agency behind a sign's myth.









## 2.3 Foucault: A Lover's Discourse




Roland Barthes, writing in the early 1970s, begins The Pleasure of the
Text with these words:


> "Imagine someone ... who abolishes within himself all barriers, all
 classes, all exclusions, not by syncretism but by simple discard of
 that old specter: logical contradiction; who mixes every language,
 even those said to be incompatible; who silently accepts every charge
 of illogicality, of incongruity; who remains passive in the face of
 Socratic irony (leading the interlocutor to the supreme disgrace:
 self-contradiction) and legal terrorism (how much penal evidence is
 based on a psychology of consistency!). Such a man would be the
 mockery of our society: court, school, asylum, polite conversation
 would cast him out: who endures contradiction without shame? Now this
 anti-hero exists: he is the reader of the text at the moment he takes
 his pleasure."23

With but a few minor revisions and reservations, this except could be
used to describe Michel Foucault. Barthes, of course, was not explicitly
writing of Foucault, but I find it hard to fathom that he could not have
made the connection, at least fleetingly, as he was composing the
passage. Or, more dramatically, perhaps Barthes had just been reading
Foucault, taking his pleasure, when he had the thought of an anti-hero
reading the anti-hero. For it is Foucault who rises above the Cartesian
*Weltanschauung* to show us what lies beyond its arbitrary structures,
for it is Foucault who reverses the paradigm, making a mockery of court
in Discipline and Punish and of asylum in Madness and Civilization.
Taking Barthes's passage in turn, it is Foucault who abolishes the
exclusions of the past and discards the arbitrary constraints of reason,
Foucault who reexamines and reconnects aspects of language said to have
been irreconcilable, Foucault who reveals the ultimate philosophical
irony: truth often lies not so much in scientific method, with its birth
perhaps in the Socratic method, but in discourse. Truth, that is, no
longer falls within the *logical* confines of the Socratic method but
within the discourse of it, within an analysis of established categories
of language, thought, and history.





<img src="../images/0374521344.gif" align="right" /> 
But even though the lines of The Pleasure of the Text excerpted above
can be interpreted as Barthes's late-career homage to Foucault's
postmodernism, Foucault would dispute the ability of semiological
analysis to detect a singular, over-arching meaning or myth under the
cloak of signifier and signified, as Barthes and Baudrillard often
attempt to do. In Mythologies, for example, Barthes writes: "What
wrestling is above all meant to portray is a purely moral concept: that
of justice."24 In another essay in Mythologies, Barthes acknowledges the
"quick-change artistry of plastic" but then goes on to say that "plastic
is, all told, a spectacle to be deciphered: the very spectacle of its
end-products"25 (with spectacle being a somewhat technical term meaning
"the interplay of action, representation and alienation in man and in
society"26). For Barthes, plastic becomes the ultimate sign of
transmutation: "Plastic, sublimated as movement, hardly exists as
substance."27 In fact:


> "The hierarchy of substances is abolished: a single one replaces them
 all: the whole world can be plasticized, and even life itself since,
 we are told, they are beginning to make plastic aortas."28





The media are a bit like plastic themselves: They are, in Max Horkheimer
and Theodor W. Adorno's words, "an ever-changing sameness." And, also
like plastic, the whole world, life itself, is being turned into media.





Barthes's playfulness notwithstanding, however, no sign, no word,
contains a singular interpretation for Foucault, even perhaps as
metaphor. Not even plastic, though the word is of course used here by
Foucault in its material sense:

> "Between word and image, between what is depicted by language and what
 is uttered by plastic form, the unity begins to dissolve; a single and
 identical meaning is not immediately common to them. And if it is true
 that the image still has the function of speaking, of transmitting
 something consubstantial with language, we must recognize that it
 already no longer says the same thing ..."29





Foucault is speaking of painting, but the same might be said about the
mass media, not only of their images but also of their signs, their
representations, their references: their language. Why? A liberation
from reason, an unfolding into madness. A liberation that

> "derives from a proliferation of meaning, from a self-multiplication
 of significance, weaving relationships so numerous, so intertwined, so
 rich, that they can no longer be deciphered except in the esoterism of
 knowledge. Things themselves become so burdened with attributes,
 signs, allusions that they finally lose their own form. Meaning is no
 longer read in an immediate perception, the figure no longer speaks
 for itself; between the knowledge which animates it and the form into
 which it is transposed, a gap widens."30





This except captures quite precisely the application of Foucault's
postmodernism to media analysis. Rendered thus, Foucault's theory bears
a direct similarity to Derrida's notion of diffErance: there is at once
the difference, or contrast, of signs in a structural system that
produces meaning and the endless deferral of meaning. That is, there is
no "final or fixed point or privileged, meaning-determining relationship
with the extralinguistic world."31





Hence: there is not much to analyze, for meaning is fleeting,
perspectival, perhaps even self-indulgent, though even that is somewhat
contradictory since there is no subject. Analysis itself, especially of
the kind steeped in reason, becomes irrelevant, an anachronism.
Postmodernism, then, becomes not so much an explanation of media content
as an acknowledgement that there are myriad explanations behind any
particular sign or image: "So many diverse meanings are established
beneath the surface of the image that it presents only an enigmatic
face."32





But perhaps I'm construing Foucault's postmodernism too broadly. For
there is a disjunction of sorts between Foucault's own theory and the
methodology that he uses to analyze histories and texts. Thus, a better
indicator of how Foucault's thought could be used to analyze <img src="../images/bkmfmad.gif" align="right" /> the mass
media and their relations to society may lie more in his methodology
than in his theory: a questioning and analysis of categorization and its
relations to power, for both are present in abundance in the mass media,
including such categories as objectivity as truth.





How, specifically, does Foucault develop his analyses? First, it is a
genealogy of sorts, and a questioning of the external conditions of
production. The rest of the answer comes from Foucault in Madness and
Civilization. In this excerpt the word "media" could be substituted for
the first instance of the word "madness":


> "To write the history of madness thus will mean the execution of a
 structural study of an historical ensemble -- notions, institutions,
 juridical and police measures, scientific concepts -- which holds
 captive a madness whose wild state can never in itself be restored."33





### 2.3.1 Pros and Cons of a Postmodern Approach



Many aspects of Foucault's theory, and of postmodernism in general, are
applicable to developing a theory of the mass media. For example, and
importantly for an analysis of the media, Foucault sees meaning as
socially constructed by institutions, including such institutions as
televisions networks, publishing houses and newspapers chains.





Other highly applicable concepts include the following: * The notion,
following from the death of the subject, that the condition of
authorship has been dissolved, leaving only an author position that
places an emphasis on what is said. This vision can be particularly
powerful in analyzing the content of the mass media, especially
television, where it is unimportant who says what; in fact, on
television the "author," including the anchors of the networks' news, is
often an actor.





However, the dissolution of authorship is double-edged, containing a
weakness that matches its strength. Because of the death of the subject
and the dissolution of the author, there does not seem to be much room
for an individual to project his or her own meaning into a media
artifact, as Roland Barthes, if nothing else, has proven that he can do.
Further: It leads little room for the construction of resistance by an
individual acting alone, especially if that individual decides to resist
through the production of his or her own discourse in the media. Does
individual resistance die with the death of the subject?





Indeed, this leads me to a major criticism of Foucault's postmodernism
when applied to the media. If the only way in which political action
becomes possible within postmodernism is through producing an
alternative discourse, how is political action or resistance possible in
the U.S. media when nearly all of them are owned by a small number of
large corporations intent on perpetuating the dominant discourse?





* A rejection of the notion of truth in favor of an unbroken chain of
signifiers. Such a position becomes powerful when combined with the
postmodern emphasis on text over speech, especially if images can be
substituted for the notion of text. Who says what does not matter, nor
what is said.





Example: In his book Breaking the News: How the Media Undermine American
Democracy, James Fallows gives an example of how TV images smother
speech with an anecdote about a CBS reporter doing a story on President
Ronald Reagan in 1984. The reporter, Lesley Stahl, had documented the
contradiction between what Reagan said and what he did by showing him
speaking at the Special Olympics and at a nursing home while pointing
out that he had cut funding to children with disabilities and opposed
funding for public health. After Stahl's piece was broadcast, she got a
call from a White House official, who praised her piece. Surprised by
the compliments, she asked the White House official why he wasn't upset,
pointing out that her piece had nailed the president. The official
replied:


> "You television people still don't get it. No one heard what you said.
 Don't you people realize that the picture is all that counts. A
 powerful picture drowns out the words."34





Perhaps this statement captures postmodern politics in action. Only
postmodernism, then, seems able to explain why all that matters is the
unbroken chain of signifiers, specifically here in the form of
television footage. On television, it no longer matters who is speaking
-- or what is being said.





In this way, and also in a more direct manner by placing an emphasis on
dominant discourse, postmodernism accounts for the close power
relationship between politics and the news.





* Postmodernism also contains a strength for media analysis in its
exhortation that those elements repressed by the dominant discourse must
be addressed. Just as much importance is placed on what is not said as
on what is said. Yet in this exhortation also lies a weakness: Surely
some of what is not said, some of the discourse repressed by the
dominant discourse, is fascist or otherwise evil and inhuman.





Nevertheless, a focus on marginal discourses in the context of the
discourse of power that take place regularly in the mass media may lead
to valuable insights.





















3 THE POWER OF THE EXPLANATION
==================================



In this section I will conclude my essay by arguing not for the
superiority of one of the theories over the others for analyzing the
mass media but rather for the use of all three theories, and others, as
appropriate to the media in question.





<img src="../images/bk_derri.gif" align="right" />
As each has its strengths and weaknesses, none of the three theories set
out above stands out definitively above the others in its explanatory
power when it comes to accounting for the mass media's role in American
society. Foucault's analysis of the categories that the media use, along
with his emphasis on discourse, is a powerful tool, but it lacks a
concrete explanation of how individual action can influence the media.
In addition, it lacks a strong political component -- which is a
necessary perspective from which to diagnose a media as politicized as
the United States'. Barthes's semiology is at once useful and seductive,
but contains, in the end, too many shortcomings. And while Althusser's
Marxism provides a better context with which to view the intricate
structural workings and influences of the media on ideology than
classical Marxism, it at the same time sets itself up, through its very
granting of relative autonomy to ideological apparatuses, to discounting
the powerful role played by America's media conglomerates.





Baudrillard's mixing of semiology and postmodernism in his book America
becomes an example of how theories can be combined to achieve a greater
degree of explanatory power than if one view is used to the exclusion of
others.





More explicitly, Douglas Kellner, in his book Media Culture: Cultural
Studies, Identity and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern,
conceives of theories as "instruments, as providing tools in a
toolkit"35 that can be used depending on context and one's purpose, a
strategy he attributes to Foucault but one that can be traced back to
Nietzsche's radical perspectivism.





In fact, Foucault's method of analysis, especially as used in Madness
and Civilization, seems to bear this out, producing profound and
powerful critiques of society's established categories, and thus the
tools-in-a-toolbox approach leads to the superiority of Foucault's
theory in general and perhaps as directed toward the media as well.





The tools-in-a-toolkit approach -- combined with Foucault's powerful
method of archaeological excavation and his use of poststructural
analyses of the signs in a social system, along with the more general
aspects of postmodernism that seem to fit the mass media so well --
gives Foucault's theory more explanatory power than the others. In fact,
postmodernism can be seen as a theory that has arisen in response to and
as part of the media and technological age, as part of an age when
culture is defined as much by media, especially television, as by such
longer-standing cultural forms as literature, art, and music.





Postmodernism's lack of explicit political content, however, remains for
me problematic, as does its decentering of the subject and its approach
to political action. In postmodernism, political action lies in the
formation of a counter discourse within existing discourse, an
enterprise which seems particularly difficult if not impossible in
America, considering that the U.S. media are owned and controlled by a
small number of corporations.

















4 NOTES
===========



1\. Ben Bagdikian, The Media Monopoly, 4th Edition (Boston: Beacon Press,
1992), p. ix.





2\. Roland Barthes, S/Z, trans. Richard Miller (New York: Hill and Wang,
1974), p. 68.





3\. Louis Althusser, <img src="..//images/1859841465.gif" align="right" />{width="100"
height="158"}] For
Marx],
trans. Ben Brewster (New York: Verso, 1996), p. 193.





4\. Althusser, quoted by Robert Lapsley and Michael Westlake, Film
Theory: An Introduction (Manchester, England: Manchester University
Press, 1988), p. 5.





5\. Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment,
trans. John Cumming (New York: Continuum, 1995), p. 120 ff.





6\. Douglas Kellner, Media Culture: Cultural Studies, Identity and
Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern (London: Routledge,
1995), throughout the book.





7\. Louis Althusser, For Marx, p. 252. Translator's glossary.





8\. Ibid. p. 252. Translator's glossary.





9\. Louis Althusser, For Marx, p. 11.





10\. Daniel Chandler, "Marxist Media Theory," published on the World Wide
Web at http://www.aber.ac.uk/\~dgc/marxism.html, 1994. Chandler is a
professor of media studies and mass communication at a university in
Great Britain.





11\. Stuart Hall, "The Problem of Ideology: Marxism without Guarantees,"
p. 29. Italics in original.





12\. Roland Barthes, Mythologies, trans. Annette Lavers (New York: Hill
and Wang, 1972), p. 111.





13\. Ibid. p. 115.





14\. Ibid. p. 114.





15\. Ibid. p. 116.





16\. Ibid. p. 131.





17\. Roland Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard Miller (New
York: Hill and Wang, 1975), p. 13.





18\. Ibid. p. 10.





19\. Ibid. p. 62. Italics in original.





20\. Roland Barthes, Mythologies, p. 121. Italics in original.





21\. Ibid. p. 121.





22\. Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, trans. Roy
Harris (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1983), p. 16.





23\. Roland Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text, p. 3. Italics in original.





24\. Roland Barthes, Mythologies, p. 21.





25\. Ibid. p. 97.





26\. Ibid. p. 7. Translator's Note.





27\. Ibid. p. 98.





28\. Ibid. p. 99.





29\. Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in
the Age of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Random House, 1965),
p. 18. Italics in original.





30\. Ibid. pp. 18-19.





31\. Simon Blackburn, The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy (Oxford, U.K.:
Oxford University Press, 1996), p. 105.





32\. Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization, p. 20.





33\. Foucault, quoted by Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference, trans.
Alan Bass (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), p. 44.





34\. James Fallows, Breaking the News: How the Media Undermine American
Democracy (New York: Pantheon, 1996), p. 62.





35\. Douglas Kellner, Media Culture, p. 24.

















5 PROPOSAL AND OUTLINE FOR THIS ESSAY
=========================================



I propose to write an essay that examines the application of three
strains of French social thought -- structural Marxism, semiology, and
postmodernism -- to analyzing the mass media. In general, the essay will
seek to examine the perspectives of these three schools toward the mass
media and its relation to culture, society, and the political and
economic order.





The first section of the essay will delineate the theoretical approaches
of the three schools to explaining the role of the mass media in
society. As needed, I will extrapolate extensions of the theories in an
attempt to account for and explain characteristics of the mass media.





The second section of the essay will compare and contrast the strengths
and weaknesses of the three theories in explaining the mass media and
its relationship to the structure of a capitalist society. I will do
this by applying the three French theories to features of current U.S.
media culture.





In the third section, I will argue for the superiority of one of the
theories over the others, grounding my argument in the power of the
theory to adequately explain several important characteristics of the
mass media in relation to society and the social system.





In the final section of the essay, I will examine the views of one of
the three schools -- the one that I argued was superior in section three
-- on the relationship between the media and resistance. How, for
example, have French scholars operating within the school seen the media
as either undermining or fostering resistance to the dominant social
order? To follow up on section two's application of the theory to U.S.
media culture, I will investigate how the theory allows for resistance,
through the media, against domination by corporate capitalism, a
particularly important question considering the near-monopoly ownership
of most of the country's media by 11 corporations.^1^





1\. Ben Bagdikian, The Media Monopoly, 4th Edition (Boston: Beacon Press,
1992), p. ix.





5.1 Proposal Bibliography


``` {.program}
Structural Marxism
Althusser           For Marx
Althusser et al     Reading Capital
Others as needed. 


Semiology
R. Barthes          Mythologies
R. Barthes          Writing Degree Zero
R. Barthes          S/Z
R. Barthes          The Pleasures of the Text

Baudrillard         The Mirror of Production
Baudrillard         Selected Writings
Baudrillard         For a Critique of the Political 
                    Economy of the Sign
Baudrillard         "The Ecstasy of Communication," 
                    in Hal Foster ed., Anti-Aesthetic
Baudrillard         America

Postmodernism
Derrida             Writing and Difference
Deleuze             Foucault
Foucault            Language, Countermemory and Power
Foucault            This is Not a Pipe
Foucault            The Order of Things
Foucault            Madness and Civilization

Structuralism
Bourdieu            "Structuralism and the Theory 
                    of the Sociology of Knowledge"
Levi-Strauss        The Savage Mind
Levi-Strauss        Structural Anthropology
Saussure            Course in General Linguistics 
```

















6 Related
=============

-   [Corporate Journalism: How Corporate Ownership of the Media
    Undermines Democracy](crit1.html)



