---
description: |
	This essay contains an sociolinguistic analysis of the language of the news media. Criticism.com also contains essays on media theory, media criticism, social science,  and discourse analysis.
keywords: |
	criticism, sociolinguistics, news media, discourse analysis,  linguistics, books, media criticism,  mass communication, media studies, journalism, media sociology, newspapers, Steve Hoenisch, book reviews, linguistic methodology, meaning, bookstore, books,  social science, media culture
title: | 
	Sociolinguistics of the News Media: Motivations for News Language Style---Audience Perception or Cultural Orientation?
---


**By Steve Hoenisch** \
Copyright 1996-2015 Steve Hoenisch | [www.Criticism.Com](http://www.criticism.com/) \
 


1 Introduction
==============

**T**his essay examines the methodology and findings of two of Allan
Bell's related sociolinguistic studies on the language of the news
media: "Radio: The Style of News Language,"1 henceforth "Radio," and
"The British Case and the American Connection in New Zealand Media
English,"2 henceforth "Media."

In particular, the essay will argue that, given the similarity of the
linguistic variables Bell
is<img src="../images/0631164359.gif" align="right" />
analyzing in the two studies, his hypothesis of audience influence upon
language in "Radio" at least partially conflicts with his hypothesis of
cultural orientation in "Media" -- that is, both hypotheses cannot be
entirely correct unless one is clearly subordinated to the other, a move
that Bell does not make in the later article.

Along these lines, I will argue that the explanation in "Radio" seems
better supported by empirical evidence presented not only in the article
but also in Chapter 6, titled "Stylin' the News: Audience Design, in
Bell's *The Language of the New Media*, while the explanation in "Media"
is ad hoc and lacks convincing empirical support.

Bell would have done better to apply "Radio's" hypothesis of audience
perceptions to the data in "Media" instead of maintaining a hypothesis
of cultural orientation. The first course is stronger because, to the
extent that the cultural orientation hypothesis is appropriate, it is
parsimoniously included in that of the audience perception hypothesis.
Yet without the explicit subordination of one hypothesis to the other,
the two hypotheses stand in opposition, both vying for the dominant
level of explanation.

<img src="../images/0812963881.gif" align="right" /> The
essay will also look at Bell's methodology and the veracity of the
conclusions that can be drawn from it. Furthermore, the essay will also
take a general look, in passing, at the substance and sociolinguistic
relevance of Bell's studies, noting on a broad level how the studies are
indicative of wider problems within sociolinguistics and noting on a
micro level several possible shortcomings in Bell's methodology.

First, I will look broadly at the content of "Radio" and summarize the
claims of "Radio" as well as examine its methodology. I will next do the
same for "Media." In the course of examining the two studies, I will
point out why the factors that are said to influence language usage
conflict.





2 A Basis for Comparison
========================

Before proceeding to look at "Radio," I would like to show why both
studies can be reasonably, though perhaps not precisely, compared on the
same footing: Some of the linguistic phenomena in the two studies are
adequately similar to allow such a comparison. In "Radio," the three
linguistic variables that Bell investigates are negative contraction,
consonant cluster reduction, and intervocalic /t/ voicing in radio news
speech. In "Media," Bell analyzes rates of determiner deletion in the
language of newspapers and radio news. In radio news language, all four
variables come into play and can be easily analyzed as similar
phenomena. In the print language of newspapers, on the other hand,
neither intervocalic /t/ voicing nor consonant cluster reduction come
into play, but negative contraction and determiner deletion are both
present and easily grouped as complementary variables -- both indicate
the use of an informal style.

A further indication that the variables are similar enough to allow
comparison is that Bell goes on to use the determiner deletion data from
"Media" to support an audience perception hypothesis in Chapter 6 of
*The Language of News Media*.





3 "Radio's" Explicit and Implicit Claims
========================================

"Radio's" descriptive content and its findings are characteristic of
much of the work that underlies sociolinguistic research: Painstaking
confirmation of the obvious. A lay observer of language knows
intuitively, for instance, that -- and this is characteristic of the
nature of
Bell's<img src="../images/0201339854.gif" align="right" />
findings -- a high rate of negative contraction typifies the language
used on rock radio stations, even during their news segments, as these
stations are obviously inclined to be more informal than, say, stations
broadcasting classical music. A high rate of negative contraction is
simply a characteristic of informal speech and would thus quite
obviously be present in broadcasting formats aimed at less formal
audiences, such as teenagers and young adults.

More interestingly, "Radio" also examines the factors that influence the
language style of news. The study lays down a strong claim: A radio
station's perception of its audience's **social status**influences the
style of language in which the station presents the news. But there is
also an implicit claim in Bell's study: That newscasters' adaption of
language style rests on their perception of audience provides indirect
evidence for the hypothesis that speakers in face-to-face communication
alter their language depending on whom they are talking to. In his book
*The Language of the News Media*, Bell makes the claim explicit: "The
processes which mould language style in mass communication are similar
in kind -- but often greater in degree -- to those which operate in
face-to-face interaction,"3 a claim I believe to be fundamentally
flawed.

3.1 Objections
--------------

My first objection to the claim that newscasters adopt their language to
whom they perceive to be their audience is that there are other factors
that influence the kind of language used in radio news: the subject and
content of the news itself (that is, whether it is serious or grim,
familiar or light, local or distant, etc.); the type of music that the
station plays; and the station's nonmusic programming. Although some of
these variables are acknowledged by Bell and held constant in the study,
others, such as music programming, do not seem to be given adequate
weight. More important, however, is the influence on media language
style of institutionalized rules that do not affect the style of
face-to-face communication. People simply do not implement an explicit
style for dealing with all their possible audiences.

In fact, overlooking the influence of institutionalized style rules on
media language points to a crucial error by Bell, one that will come to
the fore in this essay: He confuses the motivations
<img src="../images/0060976519.gif" align="right" />
for the style used in personal, face-to-face communication with the
motivations for the style used by the media. In *The Language of the
News Media*, Bell writes: "I believe the essence of style is that
speakers are responding to their audience. It is typically manifested in
a speaker shifting her style to be more like that of the person she is
talking to,"4 entailing that each listener may be spoken to differently.
Whereas individual speakers may respond to the person to whom they are
speaking, the media can respond only to the aggregation of whom they
**believe**to be their audience. Style guidelines are established to
ensure that writers address their audience **in the same way** in every
story over time. One fundamental reason this crucial difference exists,
besides that a medium often does not know exactly who its audience is,
is that the makeup of a medium's audience may be quite diverse and vary
greatly over time.

At any rate, it is clear that the language of news radio is likely to be
influenced by an interrelated web of factors, some of which may be
independent of audience, such as institutionalized style in the way of
rigidly followed stylebook guidelines. To hold that one and only one
factor -- perception of audience -- directly influences the language
style of newscasts seems dubious.

The same objection holds for face-to-face communication: People vary
their speech according to a variety of interacting factors, some of them
independent of audience. These factors include, among others, the
feelings and mind set of the speaker as well as the setting, time, and
situation during which the communication is taking place.

Moreover, some cultural factors that affect face-to-face speech,
especially in diverse immigrant communities like New York, may lie
beneath the observable surface, masked by acculturation or superficial
attempts at assimilation.

Regardless of such extra-audience factors as the influence of culture in
interpersonal communication, however, there are other reasons the
methodological approach that uses media
<img src="../images/0226103897.gif" align="right" />
language to explicate difficult-to-study speech patterns is misguided.
The most important is that the language of the news media -- which in
the case of radio news is usually based upon written text -- may not be
a reliable indicator of how different sets of people speak. In other
words, formulating conclusions about how a radio station's
**audience**speaks based on the broadcasting speech used by radio
station **announcers**is methodologically dangerous, and likely to
result in, at best, imprecise findings. Written language, even when
modified for oral presentation on the radio, is often significantly
different from spoken language. The researcher better serves his
interests and those of sociolinguistics if he or she attempts to find a
direct approach to studying the phenomena in question.

A bigger methodological problem emerges when Bell goes on to analyze the
three linguistic variables of negative contraction, consonant cluster
reduction, and intervocalic /t/ voicing. The problem, I would like to
suggest, is that identifying rates of change among stations with respect
to these three linguistic variable does nothing to sufficiently pinpoint
the cause of changes. That is, changes in these three linguistic
variables could be attributed either to an attempt by a station's news
broadcasters to mold their style to their perceived audience or to the
station's attempt to attract a certain audience to its established
programming. Indeed, the latter possibility, rather than the former,
could be borne out by Bell's finding that the news language style of
different newscasters at the same station did not vary, revealing a
strong possibility that the station's newscasting style is
institutionalized. At any rate, it remains unclear whether the style is
institutionalized to serve what it perceives to be its audience or to
attract and retain a particular audience.

Another possible problem with attributing the variation of radio speech
to announcers'
<img src="../images/0139642625.gif" align="right" />
perceptions of the social status of their audiences is the lack of
extensive empirical data and confirming research on the social
stratification of New Zealand. Bell acknowledges that the educational
and occupational scales in his study are based on a rather slim
collection of literature, but fails to examine cases in which the dearth
of data could lead to misinterpretations of an audience's status. In
"Radio," Bell draws largely on a single source, an unpublished Ph.D.
manuscript5, for his social stratification data, leaving much of the
data in his study without independent corroboration. Thus, because there
is so little data on social divisions in New Zealand, conclusions based
on this data could turn out to be inaccurate, or worse, wrong.
Furthermore, because six years had passed between the presentation of
the data in 1968 and Bell's 1974 study, Bell's findings tied to social
status may have already been slipping out of date.

3.2 Negative Contraction and Institutionalized Style
----------------------------------------------------

Another possible explanation that Bell overlooks for some of the
linguistic variations studied in "Radio" are those that may be shaped by
a radio station's stylebook or overt policies on broadcasting speech.
For instance, Bell says a striking feature of the BBC newscasters' is
that they never contract negatives. Such a pattern, however, is probably
better attributed to the influence of a set broadcasting policy than to
the broadcasters' perception of their audience. And if it is a policy
that the BBC does not contract negatives in news broadcasts, than such a
pattern is less striking than otherwise. *The New York Times,*for
instance, has an institutionalized policy on negative contractions. Its
stylebook says: "In ordinary news copy, spell out such expressions as
*is not, has not, have not, do not, are not, will not,*etc. But
contractions are acceptable in quoted matter, in feature contexts and in
headlines."6 The guidelines published for its editors by the Associated
Press, which prepares news copy for distribution to radio stations as
well as newspapers, takes a somewhat softer stance but nonetheless
advises its editors to "avoid the excessive use of contractions."7
<img src="../images/0631138250.gif" align="right" />
If the policy
on<img src="../images/063113462X.gif" align="right" />
contractions of the BBC and the other stations in Bell's study resemble
an institutionalized policy like that of *The New York Times*or the
Associated Press, negative contraction should be thrown out as an
uninformative linguistic variable. In fact, a station's overt policy on
contractions would reduce them from the status of a sociolinguistic
variable to a highly predictable component of their speech. After all, a
sociolinguistic variable, a methodological construct developed by
William Labov, "is a set of alternative ways of saying the same thing,
although the alternatives will have social significance."8

An institutional policy on the use of negative contractions would remove
the possibility of an alternative way of saying the same thing. Bell,
before using negative contractions as a sociolinguistic variable in his
study, should have determined the extent to which, if at all, each radio
station had a overt policy governing their use.

Consonant cluster reduction and intervocalic /t/ voicing, however, are
better indicators of speech patterns, for they are far less likely than
negative contraction to be regulated by a style policy.

3.3 Style Shift
---------------

In "Radio," Bell writes: "Single newscasters heard on different stations
show a remarkable and consistent ability to shift their style
considerably to suit the audience," and his data, even after subtracting
negative contraction, bears this out. The same four newscasters, who
alternated between two government-operated stations, varied their
intervocalic /t/ voicing typically by 15 percent, depending upon the
station over which they were broadcasting. These findings, coupled with
data showing that there was little to no variation among individual
newscasters at the same station, Bell's says, strongly support the
hypothesis that newscasters vary their language style depending upon who
they think is listening.9

3.4 "Radio's" Conclusion and Its Conflict with that of "Media"
--------------------------------------------------------------

In "Radio," Bell concludes that "newscasting seems to be, then, a case
where the speech patterns of individuals are subordinated to corporate
style, which correlates only with audience characteristics."10 Besides
the indeterminability of cause pointed out above, the problem with this
finding is that it clashes with Bell's findings about determiner
deletion in "Media." Corporate styles of determiner deletion, as
presented in "Media," correlate not with audience characteristics, as
Bell's conclusion of "Radio's" should have suggested, especially given
the similarity of the linguistic variables between the two studies
pointed out above, but are found to be determined by cultural
orientation. Both hypotheses can hold only if cultural orientation is
<img src="../images/020530902X.jpg" align="right" /> explicitly
subsumed as a characteristic of the audience, but Bell, unfortunately,
does not attempt to make this connection in "Media." Bell, in "Media,"
which was written after "Radio," should have directly pursued the
possibility of this causal connection rather than merely stopping with
the vague and suspect cultural orientation hypothesis.

In "Radio," moreover, Bell says that "in mass communication, the
pressure to seek approval is at its maximum, since media live by the
size and composition of their audiences." This assertion, if correct,
and Bell believes that his findings in "Radio" bear it out, leaves
unexplained the shifts within the New Zealand news media toward
American-style levels of determiner deletion -- unless those shifts are
somehow tied to an attempt by the media to seek audience approval and
retention. Yet the latter possibility can only be sustained if audiences
are seen as moving toward American culture. In other words, if Bell's
conclusions are correct in "Radio," higher rates of determiner deletion
reflect changing perceptions by the media of their audience's cultural
orientation. The rates of determiner deletion do not, however,
necessarily reflect an orientation of the media toward American styles
independent of perceptions of audience characteristics.





4 The Contentions of "Media"
============================

As I've already mentioned, Bell puts forth a different hypothesis in
"Media" than in "Radio" to account for the behavior of a similar
linguistic variable. He writes: "How frequently New Zealand mass media
apply the rule [of determiner deletion] proves to be diagnostic of their
orientation towards the culture and language of one or other" of the
United States or Britain.11 "Use of the rule of determiner deletion,"
Bell concludes, "therefore exemplifies a wider orientation by New
Zealand media to the international models of English and the cultures
from which they come."12

Unfortunately, a lack of examples with their complete context makes it
more difficult than it ought to be to analyze Bell's syntactic rule of
determiner deletion and its scope in "Media." "The rule," Bell says,
"deletes the determiner in appositional naming expressions of the form
*(the) race relations conciliator Hiwi Tauroa; (a) local resident Beth
Anderson; (his) \`Chips' series co-star Erik Estrada.*"

4.1 Problems with the Rule
--------------------------

There are problems with the way the rule is presented. First, such
examples as the second one above -- (a) local resident Beth Anderson --
would never be printed in American media without the name being set off
by commas or without the determiner deleted. That is, in American print
media, it would appear either as

(i) "Local resident Beth Anderson" was on the board of education"

or as

(ii) "A local resident, Beth Anderson, was on the board of education"

but never, even in *The New York Times,* which Bell says has one of the
lowest rates of determiner deletion among daily newspapers in the United
States, as

(iii) \*"A local resident Beth Anderson was on the board of education."

Bell is directly concerned with appositional determiner deletion, but
because of the above usages, a revealing study of determiner deletion in
American newspapers would look more closely at post-appositional
deletion, where

(A) "Beth Anderson, a local resident, was on the board of education"

is the common form used by broadsheet dailies like *The New York
Times,*while

(B) "Beth Anderson, local resident, was on the board of education"

typifies the post-appositional style used by tabloid dailies like the
*Boston Herald*or the *New York Daily News*and by broadsheets like *The
Salem Evening News*in Massachusetts that perceive their audience as
being predominantly working class. In the United States, most daily
tabloid newspapers, with the exception of *New York Newsday*and,
perhaps, *The Rocky Mountain News,*are oriented toward working-class
readers while their broadsheet counterparts appeal to a higher class.

<img src="../images/0631164359.gif" align="right" />
A sociolinguistic study of American determiner deletion such as Bell's
that looks at appositional deletion patterns alone while discarding
post-appositional patterns lacks the scope to ensure that its findings
indicate actual patterns of linguistic variation in American news
language, not merely a confirmation of a rather obvious grammatical rule
of American English, as exemplified by (i), (ii), and (iii) above. In
British English, "A local resident Beth Anderson" is a permitted form,
used by the linguistically conservative broadsheets, while in American
English, without the name set being set off by commas, it is not. The
deletion of indefinite determiners in such forms as (i) is likely to be
near 100 percent in American newspapers, with perhaps a percentage point
or two of insignificant variation attributable to editing and production
errors.

Considering that (iii) is an illegal form for American newspapers, both
tabloid and broadsheet, and a permitted form for British newspapers,
used by U.K. broadsheets but not by tabloids, a study that uses
determiner deletion rates in appositional phrases with an indefinite
article to find that New Zealand are oriented toward American print
media will misdiagnose the orientation of the New Zealand media. The
findings would not imply an orientation toward American media, but only
an orientation toward the language style of British tabloid media,
which, as we will see, may or may not have been influenced by U.S. print
media to begin dropping determiners. All tokens of the form (i), with
the indefinite article, must be discarded from the American sample. And
this Bell does not do.

There are similar, though less severe, problems with the definite
article in appositional position. The stylebook of *American Banker,*a
prestigious daily financial newspaper that operates in the
linguistically conservative tradition of American broadsheets, gives the
following
rule:<img src="../images/1572318902.gif" align="right" />
"Descriptions other than genuine titles should not be affixed to the
name *(Merrill Lynch chairman James Jones)*but either placed after the
name *(James Jones, chairman of Merrill Lynch)*or offset with a comma
before the name *(the chairman of Merrill Lynch, James Jones, ... )*."13
Similarly, the stylebook of *The New York Times*advises its writers and
editors that "long titles should follow names." It goes on to say: "Only
genuine titles -- not mere descriptions, whether lowercased or
capitalized -- should be affixed to names. Do not, for example, write
*harpsichordist Joan Manley*or *Political Scientist John P. Manley.*But
a phrase in apposition, preceded by *the*, is acceptable: *the
sociologist Margaret Manley*."14 While acceptable, however, the latter
construction tends to appear only rarely in American print media.
Preferred constructions are, as the *New York Times Stylebook*points
out, those wherein the name following the appositional phrase is set off
by a comma: *"the majority leader, John P. Manley."*15 As mentioned
above, an appositional phrase beginning with an indefinite article --
*"a sociologist Jane Manley"* -- would never appear without being
considered an error.

Thus, with respect to an example that Bell uses, only (D) would arise at
American broadsheets without breaking the style rule:

(C) \*fugitive financier Mr. Robert Vesco (D) the fugitive financier
Mr. Robert Vesco

Yet (C) and (D) nevertheless differ in an important way. In the language
of many American print media, especially tabloids, (C) is a possible,
popular, and, unlike at *American Banker*and *The New York
Times,*permitted form while (D) is an unpopular though acceptable
variation. Thus, in general, the legal possibilities would be

(E) Mr. Robert Vesco, fugitive financier

(F) Mr. Robert Vesco, the fugitive financier

(G) the fugitive financier, Mr. Robert Vesco

(H) the fugitive financier Mr. Robert Vesco

and

(I) fugitive financier Mr. Robert Vesco

The construction shown in (D) and (H), however, would not appear without
being considered at least unusual, as is the case at *The New York
Times,* or as an error, as would be the case at nearly all other
newspapers, including not only tabloids like the *New York Daily
News*and the *Boston Herald*but also such broadsheets as *The Hartford
Courant*and *American Banker.*

On the other hand, (I) would not appear without being considered an
error at such broadsheet dailies as *The New York Times, The Washington
Post, and American Banker.*

4.2 Where Have all the Determiners Gone?
----------------------------------------

Yet, in a large sample from *The New York Times,*Bell reports a
determiner deletion rate of 74 percent, significantly and surprisingly
high for a linguistically conservative U.S. broadsheet given the nature
of the rules outlined above. In the context of the above rules, *The New
York Times*should be expected to have a very low rate of determiner
deletion. Where are all the determiners going?

In a similar vein, the rate of determiner deletion was even higher for
*The Washington Post*; it was 91 percent. How can *The New York Times*'s
and *The Washington Post*'s high rates of determiner deletion be
explained given the infrequent use of (C)? Again: Where have all the
determiners gone? Why do the two American broadsheet dailies that Bell
cites -- *The Times*and *The Post*-- have such high rates of determiner
deletion? After all, the high rate does not seem to stem from the
appositional deletions of definite articles.

Bell's determiner deletion data also include indefinite articles and
possessive pronouns. Assuming, then, that the high rates among U.S.
broadsheet newspapers do not stem from the deletion of definite
articles, the answer must lie in one of the other two variables that
Bell uses: indefinite articles and possessive pronouns. The likely
explanation, then, as touched on above, is that Bell is counting
instances of (i) as determiner deletions when they should in fact not be
counted as such, since their pre-deletion state, (iii), is illegal. In
such cases, there is never a determiner to be deleted. (In this regard,
Bell is not distinguishing between phrases set off by commas and those
not set off by commas, a crucial distinction that must be made to
properly analyze the use of determiner deletion given such rules as
those outlined above.)

Another possibility, though, is that deletion of possessive pronouns in
the appositional determiner position is uncharacteristically high,
significantly bringing up the rate of determiner deletion. This,
however, seems unlikely, but given the available data, such a
possibility can be neither affirmed nor denied.

<img src="../images/0465072690.gif" align="right" /> But
if we assume that the appositional deletion of possessive pronouns is
neutral -- that is, neither outrageously high nor significantly low --
then Bell's data inflate the rate of determiner deletion among U.S.
broadsheet newspapers. Further study would be required to tease out the
possible influence of the deletion of possessive pronouns. Bell should
have distinguished, as he did with the samples from British media,
between the deletion of all determiners and the deletion of articles
only in his data on the U.S. media. Such a distinction would have
allowed a better interpretation of the U.S. data. Likewise, he should
have also distinguished between indefinite and definite article
deletion.

Another, related problem emerges in the categorizing of radio media
language, for a distinction between (D), the highly unusual and
infrequent form, and (G), the popular form, can not easily be made by
sampling radio speech, and indeed Bell opts not to make it. But, I
believe, this further skews the data, resulting in an inaccurate
characterization of determiner deletion.

4.3 The Lost Comma
------------------

From a passage in "Media," it seems that Bell may indeed be dropping the
all-important placement of the comma in his samples, but relevance of
the passage to the treatment of appositional samples is unclear because
it pertains to post-appositional forms: "When the name NP precedes, this
particular rule is inapplicable, although the determiner may still be
deleted from the following descriptive NP: as in *Mr. Robert Vesco (the)
fugitive financier.*"16 In American print media language, however, such
a form, with or without the determiner, would never intentionally appear
without a comma after the last name.

Bell's rule of determiner deletion makes no mention of comma placement
or use, though he does go on to say that "the written form invites a
comma between the two NP's of the apposition, marking the parenthetical
nature of the second NP."17

For Bell's study to have descriptive adequacy, especially with respect
to the print media samples, the use of commas must in some way be taken
into account, though this obviously presents problems for collecting
samples of radio language.

4.4 The Social Force of Determiner Deletion in U.S. Print Media
---------------------------------------------------------------

In commenting upon the U.S. data, Bell holds that the low spread of
differences in the rates of determiner deletion -- that is,
semicategorical deletion -- signifies that the rule has little social
force in the
<img src="../images/0631164359.gif" align="right" /> United
States. However, my intuition, coupled with my extensive knowledge of
U.S. print media language acquired from working for 7 years as an editor
at daily newspapers, both broadsheet and tabloid, both prestige and
popular, is that there is a social difference that can be detected among
American print media if the syntactical differences in the determiner
deletion rule for American media and British media is adequately
captured and if post-appositional determiner deletion is taken into
account. Much of this difference has already been exposed above, in
evaluating constructions that appear predominantly in broadsheets, those
the appear mostly in tabloids, and those that readily appear in both.
Specifically, the difference is this: In the United States, the more
prestigious broadsheet newspapers -- like *The Boston Globe, The
Washington Post, The Hartford Courant,* and *The New York Times,*which
appeal to the higher social classes -- adhere to a style rule similar to
that of *American Banker*'s, excerpted above. That is, they
conventionally use a form of nondeletion in appositional position but
with the name set off in commas:

(X) The chairman of the board, Michael Milken, ...

and, less frequently, the form

(X') Chairman of the board Michael Milken ...

On the other hand, the tabloid newspapers, which generally appeal to
lower social classes than the broadsheets, use the form (X') as their
standard and the form (X) much less frequently. (The form (D), as I've
mentioned, is unusual though permitted by *The New York Times*but
illegal at such other prestige newspapers as *American Banker*.)

In post-appositional position, the social force of determiner deletion
is even more strongly marked. The broadsheets would conventionally use
the form

(Y) Michael Milken, the chairman of the board, ...

and less commonly the form

(Y') Michael Milken, chairman of the board, ...

while tabloids would conventionally use (Y') and rarely (Y). Indeed, it
is in post-appositional position that the social force of determiner
deletion makes itself felt in U.S. print media.

It should be noted, however, that the broadsheets are probably
increasingly moving toward the determiner deletion standards of the
tabloids, with the changes apparently stemming from the writer-reporter
side of the news production process, with editors attempting to hold the
fort against the onslaught, winning battles but ultimately losing the
war. Perhaps it would prove worthwhile to carry out a study that
attempted to pinpoint who in the production process of the news is
having the most significant impact on determiner deletion: the reporter,
the copy editor, the main editor, or, in radio, the announcer.

4.5 The Heart of "Media's" Findings
-----------------------------------

The heart of Bell's sociolinguistic findings on the application of the
determiner deletion rule in "Media" falls into three categories:
geographical differentiation, social variation, and historical
development.

Geographically, the findings indicate, Bell says, that "there is a clear
polarization between media in Britain and in the United States."18 Yet
the findings regarding the U.S. print media are inadequate in showing,
as Bell contends, that determiner deletion has little social force.
First of all, and importantly, there are no tabloids in the U.S.
samples. Second, the comparatively low level of determiner deletion in
*The New York Times*-- 74 percent compared with *The Washington Post*'s
91 percent and the two TV stations sampled, ABC at 92 percent and CBS at
90 percent, signifies the possibility that the rule has social force. It
also signals the need to further study determiner deletion in U.S. print
media before concluding that the rule has no social force.

With respect to social variation, Bell finds that the extent of
determiner deletion in both British and New Zealand media corresponds to
the social status of their readerships. Specifically, Bell finds that
"the ranking of [British] newspapers ... for their degree of determiner
deletion corresponds almost exactly to the social status of their
readerships,"19 with high rates of determiner deletion corresponding to
lower social status and low rates corresponding to higher social status.
My only methodological concern regarding these findings is that Bell
makes no distinction between determiner deletion rates for indefinite
and definite articles, a distinction that might be relevant, for reasons
stated above, in comparing British media to U.S. media.

Bell finds the same correspondence between rates of determiner deletion
and audience social status for New Zealand radio stations as he did for
British newspapers. Commenting on this, he goes on to say, "The
polarization of radio stations reflects very accurately their
orientation towards British or American cultural and linguistic
norms."20 Further: "The rule of determiner deletion turns out to be
diagnostic of New Zealand media orientations, just as it was for British
media."21

4.6 Historical Development
--------------------------

Regarding historical development, Bell finds that between 1974, the time
of his first sample, and 1984, the time of his second sample, New
Zealand radio media showed a large shift toward the higher levels of
deletion characteristic of U.S. media. Two of the four stations studied,
in fact, underwent "a rapid and massive leap in the normally slow
timetable of linguistic change,"22 Bell writes. The sample from one of
these stations, however, was small compared with the others: only 35
compared with a range of 123 to 222 for the other three stations. Bell
also looks at changes in the rate of determiner deletion for a British
tabloid, *The Daily Mirror,*between 1920 and 1980, finding that it had a
determiner deletion rate for articles of 0 percent in 1920 but a rate of
94 percent in 1980. Bell attributes historical changes in determiner
deletion among the British press to American influence. "The mass press"
in Britain, Bell writes, "has gone over to what it sees as the less
formal, more popular American style using determiner deletion."23

Although it may be justified and correct in the end, there are several
questions left unanswered in making the inference that American media
have influenced the British tabloids to drop determiners.

First, if as Bell claims there is no social force behind the U.S.
media's use of determiner deletion, why would the British tabloids but
not the broadsheets adopt the American style? Bell's answer is that the
alleged American style of high deletion is seen as "less formal, more
popular" than the British style of less deletion. Within the data of
Bell's study, however, the problem with this association is that it
finds the British tabloids following the usage of the American
broadsheets just as much as that of the American tabloids, and there is
no indication that *The New York Times*and *The Washington Post*can be
seen as using a "less formal, more popular style," at least in the
context of American English. In fact, in the context of American
journalism, they are seen as using a formal, conservative, and
prestigious style.

Another concern bears on the nature of using cultural orientation
hypothesis, showing how convoluted its application can become. Can the
British tabloids not be seen as reorienting themselves toward American
culture? Bell does not explore this possibility. At any rate, the
possibility seems dubious, given that the British tabloids have long
influenced American tabloids, even to such an extent that,
traditionally, mass-circulation East Coast tabloids like the *Boston
Herald*and the *New York Post*have imported British editors to fill
high-ranking positions.

A second, more significant problem is that, for all we know, determiner
deletion could be **the same** figure for America broadsheets in 1945 as
it is for British tabloids during the same year. On such a possibility,
attributing adaption of determiner deletion to the influence of
American<img src="../images/0137903200.jpg" align="right" />
newspapers is unsupported. Indeed, this possibility becomes all the
stronger when the incremental changes in British tabloid use of deletion
are examined over time. The largest change -- 32 percentage points for
articles -- takes place between 1940 and 1950. The percentage change for
determiner deletion decreases every decade thereafter. Between 1950 and
1960, it is already only 17 percentage points, and between 1970 and
1980, it is a similar 14 percentage points, showing that if the British
tabloids have in fact adopted an American style, they did so decades
ago, mostly in the years between 1940 to 1950. Yet now we need to know
what the rates of determiner deletion were in the 1940s in the U.S.
media. Was the rate higher or lower than that of British tabloids by
1950 -- 47 percent? In light of Bell's own numbers, then, the history of
American determiner deletion must first be examined before it can be
said with any certainty that the British tabloids have adopted an
American norm.

Likewise -- and with this remark I will begin to conclude my essay's
argument -- it now becomes possible that the New Zealand media are
adopting not an American style but the style of the British tabloid
press.

And there is yet another possible explanation: Tabloid newspapers,
because of their tighter news holes and tendency toward presenting
shorter, pithier news stories, also have a natural, independent
motivation to adopt a style of determiner deletion, which condenses the
news language. Thus it is possible that the New Zealand newspapers have
merely moved quickly to adopt the style of tabloid newspapers in general
in order to save space, not to adjust to what they perceive as changes
in their audience's cultural orientation.

In the end, then, Bell's concluding explanation in "Media" that the "use
of the rule of determiner deletion therefore exemplifies a wider
orientation by New Zealand media to the international models of English
and the cultures from which they come"24 is neither sufficiently
supported to exclude alternative explanations nor wide enough to
accommodate internal discrepancies in the application of Bell's rule of
determiner deletion.





5 Notes
=======

1. Bell, Allan. 1982. "Radio: The Style of News Language." *Journal of
Communication 32*: 150-64.

2. Bell, Allan. 1988. "The British Base and the American Connection in
New Zealand Media English." *American Speech* 63.4: 326-44.

3. Bell, Allan. *The Language of the News Media*(Oxford, U.K.:
Blackwell, 1991), p. 104.
<img src="../images/0631164359.gif" align="right" />

4. Ibid. p. 105.

5. Vellekoop, C. "Social Stratification in New Zealand." Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Canterbury, New Zealand, 1968.

6. Jordan, Lewis ed. *The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage: A
Desk Book of Guidelines for Writers and Editors*(New York: Times Books,
1976), p. 49.

7. French, Christopher W. ed. *The Associated Press Stylebook and Libel
Manual*(New York: The Associated Press, 1987), p. 52.

8. Fasold, Ralph. *The Sociolinguistics of Language*(Oxford, U.K.:
Blackwell, 1990), p. 223-224.

9. Bell, Allan. "Radio," p. 163.

10. Ibid. p. 163.

11. Bell, Allan. "Media," p. 326.

12. Ibid. p. 327.

13. American Banker online stylebook. Unpublished. 1994.

14. Jordan, Lewis ed. *The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage: A
Desk Book of Guidelines for Writers and Editors* (New York: Times Books,
1976), p. 208.

15. Ibid. p. 122.

16. Bell, Allan. "Media," p. 328.

17. Ibid. p. 328.

18. Ibid. p. 336.

19. Ibid. p. 337.

20. Ibid. p. 338.

21. Ibid. p. 338.

22. Ibid. p. 338.

23. Ibid. p. 337.

24. Ibid. p. 327.



