---
title: |
	The Relation Between Civic Society and Newspapers in the Writings of Alexis de Tocqueville and Robert Putnam
description: |
	The Relation Between Civic Society and Newspapers in the Writings of Alexis de Tocqueville and Robert Putnam and other essays in media criticism.
keywords: |
	newspapers, criticism, media theory, critical theory, Walter Benjamin, media criticism, Adorno, Horkheimer, journalism, culture, advertising, film, American politics, democracy, press, sociology, philosophy, communication, society, Douglas Kellner, media culture, Steve Hoenisch
---

**By Steve Hoenisch** \
Copyright 1996-2015 Steve Hoenisch | [www.Criticism.Com](http://www.criticism.com/) \


1 "Equality of Condition"
=========================

<img src="../images/0060915226.gif" align="right" />

**I**n
*Democracy in America*, Alexis de Tocqueville says that the fundamental
condition underlying American Democracy is equality. "This equality of
condition," Tocqueville writes, "is the fundamental fact from which all
others seem to be derived."1 Much of the writing in Tocqueville's
two-volume work documents how the many trends of social and political
life -- such as the propensity to form associations and to read
newspapers -- stem from this "equality of condition."

The purpose of Robert Putnam's 1993 survey of civic participation in
Italy, *Making Democracy Work*, is less ambitious. It seeks to measure
the extent to which civic participation is tied to effective
governmental performance. Yet a theoretical concern with social and
political equality
<img src="../images/0691037388.gif" align="right" /> motivates Putnam's work: He refers to the new republicans, who, rather
than exalt individualism and freedom, praise a communitarian philosophy
founded on equality. Putnam sums up the views of the new republicans by
quoting John Winthrop: "We must delight in each other, make others'
conditions our own, rejoyce together, always having before our eyes our
community as members of the same body."2

The purpose of this essay is to demonstrate how Robert Putnam's findings
in Making Democracy Work and in a later study he published on civic
participation in the United States, "The Strange Disappearance of Civic
America," support Tocqueville's views. This will be accomplished in two
steps. The first will examine whether the specific views of Tocqueville
regarding associations and newspapers and the relations between them are
borne out in Putnam's findings. The second step will examine how
Putnam's findings support Tocqueville's central hypothesis: That
equality is the fundamental condition in a democracy from which others
are derived. A final section of the essay will specify several normative
implications that may be drawn from Putnam's findings, especially those
outlined in "The Strange Disappearance of Civic America."





2 Associations
==============

Among the many trends that, for Tocqueville, stem from the equality of
condition is the tendency to form associations. In nations where all
citizens are equal, as opposed to, say, nations ruled by an aristocratic
class, citizens must form associations to exercise power, Tocqueville
says. A citizen standing alone, while independent, lacks political
power, including the power to protect his or her independence. The
individual's lack of political power in turn necessitates that citizens
band together to protect their independence. Tocqueville says the
formation of associations must grow as equality advances; associations
in turn serve to protect the gains in equality by setting against one
another groups with special interests and keeping any one of them from
becoming dominant. In this way, associations play a dual role in a
politically egalitarian system: They not only arise from and but also
sustain democracy.

<img src="../images/0679728260.gif" align="right" />
<img src="../images/0679728252.gif" align="right" /> The findings of Robert Putnam support Tocqueville's observations. In his
survey of civic participation in Italy, Putnam counts the degree of
citizen participation in associations among the indicators of a region's
degree of civic community, i.e., the extent to which citizens
participate in public affairs, take active roles in their communities,
vote in regional elections, read newspapers daily, and so forth. Putnam
finds that the propensity to form associations both embodies and
reinforces civic community.

Putnam says Tocqueville observes that, among their participants,
associations foster understanding, cooperation, solidarity, and a
willingness to take part in political affairs. Surveys analyzed by
Putnam support Tocqueville's views by showing that association members
tend to exhibit more social trust, political sophistication, and civic
participation than nonmembers.

Putnam's findings in Italy bear out other observations on associations
by Tocqueville. For example, in the introduction to Democracy in
America, Tocqueville reveals his belief that within a democratic state,
voluntary associations of citizens could serve to protect the community
from, in his words, "tyranny and license."3 Putnam's study of Italy
confirms Tocqueville's early conjecture, especially if "tyranny" can be
taken to include the dominance of the mafia in Southern Italy and if
"license" can be taken to include client-patron relationships between
politicians and citizens in regions that Putnam found to be low in civic
engagement.

Tocqueville also points to a link between civil and political
associations, suggesting that there is a natural connection between the
two. Tocqueville observes that the more people come together to take
part in various affairs, the more adept they become at pursuing common
interests together. "Civil associations," Tocqueville writes,
"facilitate political association."4 Putnam's study of Italy again
supports Tocqueville's statements. Although Putnam does not document the
direct relationship between the existence of civil associations and
political ones, he does show that the regions with a comparatively large
number of sports, leisure, and cultural associations also tend to be the
regions that rank higher in other correlates that indicate civic
community. For Putnam, the density of sports clubs, for example,
provides the "first clues as to which regions most closely approximate
the ideal of the civic community."5





3 Link between Associations and Newspapers
==========================================

As Putnam points out, Tocqueville also emphasized the connection between
newspapers and associations, civic community, and equality.
Specifically, Tocqueville makes the following observations about the
relationships among these elements in democratic countries:

* Without newspapers, there would be no common activity.
Similarly, as the number of associations increases, so does the number
of newspapers.

* An inverse relationship holds between administrative
centralization and the number of newspapers: The less centralized the
government, the more newspapers there are.

* As citizens become more equal, the necessity of
newspapers increases.

Although his survey of Italy did not directly address all three of these
observations by Tocqueville, Putnam did find that the incidence of
newspaper readership was indeed closely correlated with membership in
associations (other than religious ones). Putnam also found that the
regions with the highest levels of newspaper readership were the same
regions in which a strong civic community was otherwise the norm. This
is one way in which Putnam's findings link Tocqueville's views regarding
newspapers and associations back to Tocqueville's fundamental premise:
that equality is the source from which many of the social norms that
undergird successful democracy are derived.

But extending Putnam's findings about the links between newspapers,
associations and civic community to (i) the presence of social and
political equality and (ii) Tocqueville's statement that the incidence
of newspaper readership and association membership seem to derive from
equality poses serious problems.

First, Putnam includes the attribute of equality in his definition of a
civic community.6 Thus, the incidence of association participation and
newspaper readership -- both used by Putnam as indicators of civicness
-- shows the existence of equality only by implication. In other words,
to conclude that Putnam's findings on civic community confirm
Tocqueville's views that association membership and newspaper readership
rise with equality would be to implicitly stack the evidence in
Tocqueville's favor.

Second, it is even a greater leap to conclude that Putnam's findings
support Tocqueville's hypothesis that newspaper readership and
association membership derive from equality. Putnam's findings, at least
as outlined in chapters 1 and 4 of Making Democracy Work, suffice to
show only that a positive correlation exists between civicness and
association membership and newspaper readership. Putnam does not
conclusively show that either equality of condition or the degree of
civic community causes greater newspaper readership or association
participation. Indeed, to do so would be to engage in circular
reasoning. But this does not seem to keep Putnam from engaging in some
circular reasoning of his own. He writes: "The more that politics
approximates the ideal of political equality among citizens following
norms of reciprocity and engaged in self-government, "the more civic
that community may be said to be."7 In other words, the more political
equality that citizens in a community have, the more equal that
community can be said to be.

Nevertheless, other, more direct studies carried out by Putnam in Italy
do directly support Tocqueville's contention that where there is
equality, at least social and political equality, civic participation
and successful democratic environments can also be found. (But this does
not necessarily mean, as noted above, that all other facts are derived
from equality.) For instance, one of Putnam's surveys included direct
questions to regional councilors on equality. His Index of Support for
Political Equality closely mirrors the region's degree of civic
community, as a Tocqueville reader would expect. Councilors in the more
civic regions were "avowed egalitarians," while councilors in the less
civic regions expressed preferences for leadership by traditional elites
within a social and political hierarchy.8 But while Putnam's Index of
Support for Political Equality does not prove that social and political
equality generates civic participation, it does lend credence to
Tocqueville's hypothesis.





4 TV Undermining Civic Participation in U.S.
============================================

While Putnam's 1993 book, Making Democracy Work, sought to examine the
connection between effective government and civic participation in
Italy, his 1996 article, titled "The Strange Disappearance of Civic
America," attempted to uncover the factors behind the sharp decline of
civic participation in the United States since the 1960s. The most
likely culprit, Putnam discovers, is a factor that even an analyst of
culture as insightful as Tocqueville could not have foreseen:
television.

Yet the observations that Tocqueville does make are borne out in "The
Strange Disappearance." Again, they include such correlations as the
incidence of newspaper readership and participation in civic
associations. Indeed, such statistics as the incidence of newspaper
readership, voter turnout, and the level of social trust -- which rise
and fall together -- are measures that Putnam uses to calculate civic
participation.9

If Putnam's confirmation of these correlations and his finding that
television is the likely culprit behind the decline in civic
participation in American are accepted, several normative implications
come to light.

<img src="../images/0691037388.gif" align="right" /> First,
if civic participation -- which, as Putnam demonstrates in Making
Democracy Work, underlies successful government performance in Italy --
is to be revived, television will have to brought into check.
Unfortunately, it may be that this can be done only at the cost of
infringing on freedom of expression. On the other hand, perhaps the
Federal Communication Commission could regulate television without
violating free speech. Because airwaves are part of the public domain,
the FCC could require television stations to broadcast a certain amount
of "civic" programming. Specifically, the FCC could, for instance,
reintroduce a revised Fairness Doctrine mandating that stations set
aside daily segments for the presentation of conflicting views by
citizens on community issues. The FCC could also impose daily
requirements of community access as conditions for the renewal of a
station's broadcasting license.

If television has undermined civic participation for the generations
that came of age after World War II despite a parallel rise in the level
of education that these generations received, especially since, as
Putnam points out, education is the strongest correlate of civic
engagement, then an important normative implication of these two trends
is to better educate school children about television and its effects.
Public schools should teach students to analyze television programs and
commercials not only for content but also for their potential social and
political impact. Social studies curriculums should include substantial
components in which students investigate the relationship between
television and participatory democracy.

Considering that, as Putnam points out, "controlling for differential TV
exposure significantly reduces the correlation between education and
engagement" and that children spend on average about 40 hours a week
watching TV, another normative implication of Putnam's findings is that
significantly extending the school week of children may eventually
result in an increase in civic participation.10 Although television
viewing increases with age, people who spend less time as children
watching TV and more time engaging in learning and other participatory
endeavors may develop into citizens more likely to play active roles in
their communities.





5 Widening Gulf between Rich and Poor
=====================================

<img src="../images/1567511848.gif" align="right" /> One
potential culprit that Putnam does not consider directly in "The Strange
Disappearance" is social and economic equality. When Tocqueville left a
France dominated by aristocrats to tour America in 1831 and 1832,
nothing struck him more forcibly than the "equality of condition." Yet
even though Putnam did find strong correlations, at least indirectly,
between political and social equality and civic participation in Italy,
he does not venture to consider the potential effect that social and
economic inequality has had on civic participation in the United States.
Although it would be difficult here to show whether the decline in civic
participation is the cause or the result of inequality, it is clear that
as the gulf between the rich and poor -- that is, social and economic
inequality -- has been widening, civic engagement has been decreasing.
If Tocqueville's hypothesis that civic community stems from equality is
true, then one would expect civil participation to drop as equality
decreases. As this seems to be the case, it adds circumstantial support
to Tocqueville's view, even though the exact nature of the relationship
would need to be further investigated through empirical research.

Yet other evidence does indicate potential support for Tocqueville's
observations. Tocqueville, as mentioned above, holds that as citizens
become more equal, the necessity of newspapers increases. If <img src="../images/0691037388.gif" align="right" /> his
observations are correct, the inverse should hold as well: as citizens
become less equal, the necessity of newspapers decreases. And, indeed,
as the gulf between rich and poor families in the United States has
slowly climbed to the highest among industrial nations,11 newspaper
readership has been declining, down 39 percent between 1965 and 1980.12
Of course, this does not mean that a decline in equality necessarily
causes decreases in newspaper readership, nor does it expose the exact
nature of the correlation. But it does show that a correlation between
readership and equality may exist, as Tocqueville observes.

All told, the findings of Putnam in both his 1993 book and his 1996
essay support the observations of Tocqueville about the relationships
between newspaper readership, association participation, and equality.
Yet the exact nature of these relationships -- whether equality is a
cause or a result of them -- remains unclear. As such, Tocqueville's
overarching hypothesis that such trends in a democracy as the
formulation of associations and the incidence of newspaper readership
derive from equality also remains to be verified by further empirical
investigation.





6 Notes
=======

1. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. 1, Vintage
Classics edition (New York: Random House, 1990), p. 3.

2. Robert Putnam, Making Democracy Work (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press: 1993), p. 87.

3. Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Vol. 1, p. 9.

4. Tocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. 2, p. 115.

5. Putnam, Making Democracy Work, p. 92.

6. I am interpreting what Putnam calls "horizontal relations of
reciprocity and cooperation" (Making Democracy Work, p. 88) as embodying
social and political equality.

7. Putnam, Making Democracy Work, p. 88.

8. Ibid. pp. 102 and 103.

9. Robert Putnam, "The Strange Disappearance of Civic America," The
American Prospect (No. 24, Winter 1996), charts, p. 43.

10. Ibid. pp. 47 and 48.

11. "Study: U.S. Tops Wealth Gap," Associated Press wire story, August
14, 1995.

12. Squires, James D. Read All About It! The Corporate Takeover of
America's Newspapers (New York: Random House, 1993), p. 94.




