---
title: |
	Reclaim the Media
---



There's a group in Seattle that goes by the name *Reclaim the Media*. I
heard about them during a local station break of Democracy Now.

There is only one way to retake the mainstream media in this country,
something that cannot be done: To gain control of it at the level of the
contributor, as Raymond Williams has written in *Communications*.

Many people -- Chomsky, for example -- have been trying to enlighten the
media for years through piercing, poignant, and accurate criticism, much
of it based in empirical analysis. Hasn't worked. Among journalists,
groupthink dominates; *The Seattle Times* provides a daily example. Many
journalists uncritically and tacitly adopt the dominant values and ideas
of the system in which they are embedded -- a system that has radically
moved to the right during the past 28 years. [Corporate
control](crit1.html) has shifted the focus of the media from serving the
public -- from being the guardian of the public's right to know and from
holding the government accountable -- to serving the business interests
of their owners. Those interests are, in a word, plutocratic.

The only plausible course of action is to go after the audience of the
media. Part of the answer is media literacy: Helping people decode the
media at the grassroots level and at the national level. Despite its
name, Seattle's Reclaim the Media aims to do just that.

Media literacy can expose discourses of domination, identify the
[values](weber1.html) that underlie a report, and unearth the
[perspective](media-criticism-with-french-social-thought.html) that
governs what news is covered and how. Media literacy can't just be about
decoding messages. It also must be about decoding [media
culture](kellner.html), including its structures, relationships of
power, and collective fantasies, as Ken Sanes has done with his work on
film at [www.transparencynow.com](http://www.transparencynow.com/).

Check out [www.ReclaimTheMedia.org](http://www.reclaimthemedia.org/).


