---
author: By Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    How to improve the search engine rankings of your web pages by using
    free legitimate search engine optimization (SEO) techniques for natural
    search results.
keywords: |
    search engine optimization, SEO, search engine optimization techniques,
    SEO techniques, search engine rankings, improve search engine rankings,
    search engine optimization how to, improve natural search results
title: 'Search Engine Optimization (SEO) Techniques'
---



How To Improve Your Search Engine Rankings
------------------------------------------

This page describes a number of free, legitimate search engine
optimization techniques to improve your search engine ranking in natural
search results. Search engine optimization, or SEO, is the process of
optimizing a web page or web site to boost its rankings in search
engines such as Yahoo and Google.

Using one or two of the following SEO tips in isolation is unlikely to
boost your natural search results -- with the possible exception of the
first three techniques. Using all of these SEO techniques together,
however, is a potent formula for improving your search engine rankings
-- especially if you continually do so as part of an SEO *program*.

1\. **Use the first heading on your page to summarize the content of the
page and set the heading in an H1 tag.** Begin your page with a heading
that accurately and concisely describes what the page is about. The
heading captures the page's content in plain language and includes the
page's subject. Topicality is key. Example:

`<h1>Search Engine Optimization (SEO) Techniques</h1>`

Your top-level heading might be made up solely of a target keyword or
keyword phrase; see related suggestions below.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on using the H1 tag for your first
heading for SEO.](h1.html)

**2. Place your heading in the title tag within your HTML header and
limit the text to no more than about 66 characters, including spaces.**
In the search results of the world's most important search engine,
Google, the text in the title tag is cut off after 66 characters and
replaced with an ellipsis. Just as with the first heading on your page,
the text in your title element is tailored to represent exactly what the
content of your page is about. Typically, the text in your title tag
should match or closely resemble your first headline on the page, or be
a shortened version of your first heading if the heading is longer than
66 characters. Example:

`<title>Search Engine Optimization (SEO) Techniques</title>`

For most web sites, it is important that you make sure the top-level
heading and the text in the title tag are tailored to the content of
their page -- not the overall focus of your web site. Making your title
text the same across all your pages is a critical mistake (and for most
web sites, using marketing-focused or brand-oriented language for your
titles is an even worse mistake that is virtually guaranteed to
undermine your results for those individual pages). Ditto for including
the name of your web site in the title tag in pages other than your home
page, your site map, or a similar top-level navigational page.

In addition, including a category and subcategory in the title tag is
another critical error -- and a troubling one because several SEO firms
recommend it. In my opinion, such a practice is radically misguided: In
many cases, it is likely to result in less than optimal results.

![Screen shot of title in Google search
results.](images/seo_title_character_count.jpg)

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on writing unique and accurate
titles for SEO.](title.html)

**3. Include an accurate description of the page's content in the
metadata.** Again, the description represents the content of the page in
which it is embedded, not the content of the whole web site. Here's an
example:

`<meta name="description" content="Improve the search engine rankings of your web pages by using these free, legitimate search engine optimization (SEO) techniques for natural search results.">`

To avoid having your description cut off mid-sentence in Google's search
results (when it displays the description), the description should be no
longer than about 156 characters and spaces. In news stories, the
description may be the same as or similar to the lead, or lede, a
nutshell statement that often appears as the first sentence or paragraph
of a news story to summarize the news in the article.

The simple fact that Google frequently displays the content from the
description metadata tag in search results makes the inclusion of this
element both useful for SEO -- it is indexed -- and useful to people
searching for information -- it is often displayed in results.

**4. Include in the metadata field for keywords a few highly relevant
words from the page's text.** These keywords represent and categorize
your page's content. Again, the keywords that you include in the
metadata are specific to the page in question and accurately classify
its content. Include synonyms. Here's an example of how to do it:

`<meta name="keywords" content="search engine optimization, SEO, search engine rankings, improve search engine rankings, better search engine rankings, improve natural search results, enhance organic search results">`

The keywords that you select for your metadata naturally recur in the
content of the page -- because that is what the page is about. If a
keyword does not appear in the page's content, avoid using it in the
metadata.

It is important that you do not stuff your metadata or your content with
keywords. Doing so is a deceptive, illegitimate technique that, in
addition to being dishonest, is likely to undermine your web site's
overall ranking or get the page removed from search engine indexes.
Instead, if you are creating a page to target a keyword, engineer your
content to contain in-depth information about your keyword and several
*natural* recurrences of the keyword in the text. Topicality and depth
are key.

Again, it is a critical error to use the same keywords for all your
pages, to use too many keywords (maybe more than 10), or to use keywords
about your brand to represent the content on your page. The keywords
that you choose to describe your page must match what your page is
about. If you have a target keyword or keyword phrase for your page, use
it as your top-level heading and set it in an H1 tag.

The code at the top of the page now looks like this:

``` {space="preserve"}
<head>
 <title>Search Engine Optimization (SEO) Techniques</title>
 <meta name="description" content="Improve the 
  search engine rankings of your web pages by using
  these free, legitimate search engine optimization
  (SEO) techniques.">
 <meta name="keywords" content="search engine optimization,
  SEO, search engine optimization techniques, SEO techniques,
  search engine rankings, improve search engine rankings, 
  better search engine rankings, improve natural search results">
</head>
 <h1>Search Engine Optimization Techniques</h1>
```

To view this example in context, you can look at the code of this page:
Right-click on the page and then click View Source.

**5. Present high-quality content that delivers on the promise of the
title, description, and keywords in your metadata and the first heading
on your page.** By high-quality content, I mean written and edited to
meet the standards of professional publishing -- content that could be
published as a magazine article or as an entry in an encyclopedia. The
content is clear, direct, organized, factual, detailed, and informative.
It has breadth and, more importantly, depth: For SEO, topical depth
trumps topical breadth.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on writing high-quality content for
free SEO.](writing-for-free-seo.html)

**6. Use descriptive URLs.** The words that you use in your directory
paths and file names are indexed by search engines and are searchable.
Use the names of the directories in the path to classify the content and
the file name to identify its subject. For example, the directory in
which this file appears is `/seo/` and the name of this file is
`search-engine-optimization.html`. Separate the words in the file name
with a hyphen. Semantic paths and file names -- which with your domain
name make up the URL for your page -- can help improve your page's
ranking for navigational search.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on using descriptive folder and
file names for SEO.](url.html)

**7. In your content, add a few inline hyperlinks to closely related
pages.** Set the links in HTML, not script. For example, in a typical
news story in *The New York Times* online, the editors set links to
several closely related keywords in each story.

**8. At the end of the content, link to other closely related pages.**
Again, set your links in HTML, not script.

**9. Create an XML site map for your web site, name it sitemap.xml, and
place it in your root public HTML folder so search engines can find
it.** Then, submit it to Google by using a Google webmaster account,
which you can set up at <http://www.google.com/services/>. For more
information about XML site maps, see <http://www.sitemaps.org/>. To
automatically generate an XML site map, go to
<http://www.xml-sitemaps.com/>.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on using an XML Site Map for
SEO.](xml-site-map.html)

**10. Create an HTML site map for your visitors that classifies your
pages and shows the topical relationships among them.** Again, make sure
you set your links in HTML, not script.

**11. Structure your web site around menu pages for the key high-level
categories of your content pages.** If your web sites is about snow
sports, for example, create menu pages for each sport and use those menu
pages to link to all your content pages on that topic.

**12. Add crawlable text-based links to your menu pages and your site
map at the bottom of each page in your site, including your home page.**
Here's an example of how to do it:

![Text links at the bottom of a page.](images/seo_text_links.jpg)

**13. Add Dublin Core metadata elements to the HTML header of your
page.** Although including metadata based on the [Dublin
Core](http://dublincore.org/) specification in your web page probably
won't help with most search engines, there are some that use it, and
more may do so in the future. There is a Dublin Core metadata generation
engine at
<http://webposible.com/utilidades/dublincore-metadata-gen/index.html?lang=en>.

The HTML format of Dublin Core metadata looks like this:

``` {space="preserve"}
<link rel="schema.DC" href="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/">
 <meta name="DC.title" content="Search Engine Optimization">
 <meta name="DC.description" content="Improve the
  search engine rankings of your web pages by using these free, 
  legitimate search engine optimization (SEO) techniques for 
  natural search results.">
 <meta name="DC.subject" content="search engine optimization,
  SEO, search engine optimization techniques, SEO techniques,
  search engine rankings, improve search engine rankings, 
  better search engine rankings, improve natural search results">
 <meta name="DC.language" scheme="ISO639-1" content="en">
```

The format is slightly different for
[XML](http://www.criticism.com/dita/xml_intro.html) and XHTML. Either
way, place the Dublin Core metadata in the header of your web page just
after your usual HTML metadata.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on using Dublin Core metadata for
SEO.](dublin-core-metadata.html)

**14. Create a robots.txt file and place it in your root public HTML
folder.** The `robots.txt` file specifies the directories and files that
you want search engines to crawl, and it excludes those that you want
crawlers to ignore. Make sure the contents of your robots.txt is
providing appropriate indexing [instructions](http://www.robotstxt.org/)
to crawlers. Here's an example of robots.txt file's instructions:

``` {space="preserve"}
User-agent: *
# Block the following directories from being indexed
Disallow: /css/
Disallow: /dita/ss/
Disallow: /dita/dtd/
Disallow: /flash/
Disallow: /includes/
Disallow: /scripts/
# Block the following pages from being indexed
Disallow: /directory/file.html
# Block the following file extensions from being indexed
Disallow: /*.js$
Disallow: /*.txt$
```

**15. Engineer your site to present an interlinked network of in-depth
information about a subject and its related topics.** If, for example,
one of your keyword targets is *ski racing*, you probably won't be able
to get into the top 20 results with a single page. Building up a number
of related, interlinked, high-quality pages on the topic will help boost
your ranking. In other words: Develop a semantic network of content that
reinforces your keywords. Include multiple subpages to reinforce a given
topic with breadth and depth.

**16. Include in each page images or other media that complement or
reinforce the content of the page.** Use semantic URLs for your images
and provide alternative text for each one.

**17. Add yourself (or your company) to Facebook, LinkedIn, MySpace,
Yelp, and other social networking sites -- and always include a link to
your web site.** Develop an SEO strategy for social media. Put some
photos on Flickr and some videos on YouTube. And tweet about it all on
Twitter, if you must. For a list social networking sites, see
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_social_networking_websites>.

**18. Use web analytics to identify ways to increase your web site's
traffic.** A free web analytics program such as [Google
Analytics](http://www.google.com/analytics/) can yield valuable insights
into your web site's traffic -- insights that you can tap to boost
traffic. Increasing your traffic will likely improve your search engine
rankings.

**19. Get others to link to your site by generating compelling, perhaps
even controversial, content.** What content can you publish that will
induce other web writers, bloggers, journalists, and the like to link to
your site? You also might want to consider reaching out to web sites on
similar topics to exchange links.

**20. Break up the content of your page with subheadings and set the
headings in an H2 tag.** Engineer the headings so they contain the
keywords that the page targets.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on structuring content with HTML
Heading Tags for SEO.](html-heading-tags-structure.html)

**21. Use a standardized approach to create web documents.** Document
markup standards such as DocBook or DITA can help ensure that every web
page contains a title, a description, and a set of keywords in the
metadata.

![plus sign](/images/plus.gif) [More on using DocBook XML for
SEO.](docbook.html)

**22. Implement a continuous publishing program** so you can constantly
tune each page to achieve your SEO objectives and then republish it with
ease.

**23. Write strong anchor text for each link to another page on your
site.** Adding links with strong anchor text tells readers where you're
sending them. The anchor text, which is the words displayed in a
hyperlink, should match or closely resemble the title of the page or a
section heading of the link's destination.

Here's an example of how to write strong anchor text for SEO:

Poor anchor text:

To see how to create an XML site map for SEO, [click
here](/seo/xml-site-map.html).

Better anchor text:

See using an [XML site map for SEO](/seo/xml-site-map.html).

*--Steve Hoenisch*

**Related**

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Set Your First Heading in the H1
Tag for SEO](/seo/h1.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Include a Unique, Accurate Title
in Your HTML Document's Header](/seo/title.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Apply HTML Heading Sizes to
Reveal the Structure of Content to Search
Engines](/seo/html-heading-tags-structure.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Use Dublin Core Metadata for
Search Engine Optimization](/seo/dublin-core-metadata.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Tag DocBook XML Documents for
Search Engine Optimization](/seo/docbook.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Use an XML Site Map for
SEO](/seo/xml-site-map.html)

Last Updated: Oct. 21, 2011.
















