---
author: By Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    SEO basics: A concise description of search engine optimization
    techniques for content-based web pages.
keywords: |
    SEO basics, search engine optimization, SEO, search engine optimization
    techniques, SEO in a nutshell, seo fundamentals
title: SEO Basics
---


Search Engine Optimization in a Nutshell
----------------------------------------

This page presents a concise description of legitimate search engine
optimization techniques for content-based web pages. The use of one or
two of the following SEO tips in isolation is unlikely to boost your
natural search results -- with the possible exception of the first three
techniques. Applying all the following techniques at once is a potent
content-focused formula for improving search engine rankings. In the
end, the key to SEO for content is highly focused work that pays strict
attention to a number of details simultaneously.

Use the first heading on your page to summarize the content of the page
and set the heading in an H1 tag. The heading accurately and concisely
describes what the page is about in plain language. It includes the
page's subject: Topicality is key.

Place the heading in the title tag within your HTML header and limit the
text to no more than about 66 characters, including spaces. In the
search results of Google, the text in the title tag is cut off after
about 66 characters and replaced with an ellipsis.

Using marketing-focused, brand-oriented language for your titles is a
critical error that is virtually guaranteed to undermine your results
for those pages. Ditto for including the name of your company or web
site in the title tag in pages other than your home page, your legal
pages, your site map, or a similar top-level navigational page.

Including a category and subcategory in the title tag is another
critical error -- and a troubling one because several SEO firms
recommend it. It is unlikely to produce optimal results. The place for
categories and subcategories is in descriptive URLs, discussed later.

Include an accurate description of the page's content in the metadata.
Again, the description represents the content of the page in which it is
embedded, not the content of the whole web site. To avoid having your
description cut off mid-sentence in Google's search results (when it
displays the description), the description should be no longer than
about 156 characters and spaces. Think of the description as being your
*lede*, the nutshell statement that summarizes the news in a story.
Example:

`<meta name="description" content="Abstract: A text linguistics thesis  that conducts a topical structure analysis of  accomplished English prose by studying newspaper editorials."/>`

Include in the metadata field for keywords a few highly relevant words
from the page's text. These keywords categorize your page's content. The
keywords are specific to the page in question and accurately classify
its content. Include synonyms. Example:

`<meta name="keywords" content="topical structure analysis, topic, comment, theme, rheme, discourse analysis, text linguistics, newspapers, editorials"/>`

The keywords that you select for your metadata naturally recur in the
content of the page -- because that is what the page is about. If a
keyword does not appear in the page's content, avoid using it in the
metadata.

Every page should target a keyword or keyword combination, such as Linux
Desktop Management. Try to include a closely related -- preferably
subsidiary -- secondary target. The target keyword or keyword phrase is
to appear as or in your top-level heading and is set in an H1 tag. Set
your secondary target in a subheading.

Engineer the content to contain in-depth information about your keyword
target and several natural recurrences of the keyword in the text.
Again, topicality and depth are key: Stay on topic, provide details.

Don't waste time going after high-level, waste-basket categories like
"group policy management"; instead, make sure the page addresses the
correct level in the taxonomy's hierarchy: "group policy for Linux,
Unix, and Mac."

Before you write, query Google to check the ranking of others for the
target. Analyze the search results with an eye toward engineering your
content to obtain a place among the results, but don't waste time
obsessing over the results, which will vary over time according to a
number of factors, many of which you cannot control. Like the fitness
and diet business, the web and the tech industry are rife with SEO
shamans: Anyone who tells you they can guarantee results, or imply that
they have a magic formula, is lying in an effort to steal your money, or
worse: They will employ illegitimate techniques that temporarily boost
your rankings -- until the search engines find out, which they will, and
then your site will be penalized. The simple fact of the matter is that
SEO requires highly focused content engineering that pays strict
attention to a number of details simultaneously, which leads to the most
important point:

Present high-quality content that delivers on the promise of the title,
description, and keywords in your metadata and the first heading on your
page. By high-quality content, I mean written and edited to meet the
standards of professional publishing -- content that could be published
as a magazine article or as an entry in an encyclopedia. The content is
clear, direct, organized, factual, detailed, and informative. It abides
by the rules in The Chicago Manual and Words into Type. It has breadth
and, more importantly, depth: For SEO, the topical depth of a page is
far more important than its topical breadth. All other things being
equal, fact-based information with technical content that's written from
a neutral point of view will trump marketing-oriented information every
time.

After you've written your draft, edit your material for word order,
frequency, and relevancy. Be specific while maintaining relevance to the
topic. Repeat your target keyword or keyword combination and its
synonyms in your text a couple of times without splitting the word
order.

Use descriptive URLs. The words that you use in your directory paths and
file names are indexed by search engines and are searchable. Use the
names of the directories in the path to classify the content and the
file name to identify its subject. Example:

http://www.criticism.com/discourse-analysis/topical-structure.html

In your content, add a few inline hyperlinks to closely related pages,
especially pages that provide depth -- supporting information and
technical details -- about the topic. Set the links in HTML, not script,
to expose them to crawlers. At the end of the content, link to a few
closely related pages.

The ultimate goal is to engineer your content to present an interlinked
network of in-depth information about a subject and its related topics.
Building up a number of related, interlinked, high-quality pages on a
topic will help boost your rankings. In other words: Develop a semantic
network of content that reinforces your keywords.

Include multiple subpages to reinforce a given topic with breadth and
depth. Typically, to get into a high-level, contested category, you must
create a number of related, interlinked pages with high-quality content
on the category and its subcategories. Include in each page an image or
screen shot that complements or reinforces the content of the page. Use
descriptive URLs for your images and provide descriptive alternative
text for each one.

Break up the content of your page with subheadings and set the headings
in an H2 tag. Engineer the headings so they contain the secondary
keywords that the section targets. A hierarchical structure that
includes a main topic and discreet subsections, all marked off by
correctly sized headings, shows readers and search engines alike what
information is important and what information provides supporting
details. Readers can more easily scan the content for the information
they want, and search engines can more accurately categorize the page's
content.

If you use H2 for a subheading directly under the H1 tag, then H3 might
become the heading used for the subsequent sections. The point is that
you want to begin with the H1 heading at the top of the page and create
a hierarchy from the top down, with each subsequent section that is at
the same level in the hierarchy being represented by the same size
heading. Each nested subsection is headed by a smaller sized heading,
resulting in an outline format.

For consistency, develop a standardized approach to structuring your web
pages. Use a content model that forces each page to adhere to both your
local objectives (SEO as well as clearly organized and structured
information) and global objectives (such as selling software).

*--Steve Hoenisch*

**Related**

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Set Your First Heading in the H1
Tag for SEO](/seo/h1.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Include a Unique, Accurate Title
in Your HTML Document's Header](/seo/title.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Apply HTML Heading Sizes to
Reveal the Structure of Content to Search
Engines](/seo/html-heading-tags-structure.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Use Dublin Core Metadata for
Search Engine Optimization](/seo/dublin-core-metadata.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Tag DocBook XML Documents for
Search Engine Optimization](/seo/docbook.html)

Last Updated: August 2, 2011.
















