---
author: By Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    For free SEO, focus on writing high-quality fact-based content that
    delivers on the promise of the page's title.
keywords: |
    SEO, search engine optimization, SEO writing, search engine optimization
    techniques, search engine optimization writing, SEO editing
title: 'Write High-Quality Content for Free SEO'
---


Like the fitness and diet business, the web and the tech industry are
rife with SEO [shamans, schemers, and
frauds](http://www.google.com/support/webmasters/bin/answer.py?answer=35291).
Anyone who tells you they can guarantee results, or imply that they have
a magic SEO formula, is lying in an effort to steal your money, or
worse: They will employ illegitimate techniques that temporarily boost
your rankings -- until the search engines find out, which they
eventually will, and then your site will be
[penalized](http://www.google.com/support/webmasters/bin/answer.py?answer=35291).

This page argues that high-quality content is the foundation of
effective search engine optimization. The simple fact of the matter is
that SEO for content-based web pages requires highly focused writing and
editing that pays strict attention to a number of details
simultaneously. Most of those details, however, boil down to this simple
maxim:

Present high-quality content that delivers on the promise of the title,
description, and keywords in your metadata and the first heading on your
web page.

By high-quality content, I mean content that is written and edited to
meet the standards of professional publishing -- content that could be
published as a magazine article or as an entry in an encyclopedia. The
content is clear, direct, organized, factual, and informative. It
abides, for example, by the rules in The Chicago Manual of Style and
Words into Type.

The content must have breadth and, more importantly, depth: For SEO, the
topical depth of a page is far more important than its topical breadth.
All other things being equal, fact-based information with detailed
technical content that's written from a neutral point of view will trump
marketing-oriented information every time.

You should, by all means, engineer your content to include your keyword
target in your title, to contain in-depth information about your keyword
target, and to include several natural recurrences of the keyword in the
text. But still, topicality and depth are key: Stay on topic, provide
details.




### Publishing Standards

You can use long-standing publishing standards to foster high-quality
content. The following stylebooks, for instance, can help build a
standards-based editorial program to create solid content:

The Chicago Manual of Style; Words Into Type; Microsoft Manual of Style
for Technical Publications; The New York Times Manual of Style; The
Associated Press Manual of Style; and The Apple Manual of Style.

Word usage, syntax, sentence construction, inter-sentential
construction, and structural organization usage are governed by the
following books, all well-regarded books on writing:

Style: Toward Clarity and Grace, by Joseph M. Williams; The Elements of
Style, by Strunk and White; On Writing Well, by William Zinsser; and
Watch Your Language, by Theodore M. Bernstein.

Another approach is put in place a system of continuous publishing so
you can constantly revise and improve the content of a page (or your
whole site) and then overwrite the published version with the latest
version. Doing so helps tune your content to achieve your SEO
objectives.

*--Steve Hoenisch*






### Related

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Include a Unique, Accurate Title
in Your HTML Document's Header](/seo/title.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Apply HTML Heading Sizes to
Reveal the Structure of Content to Search
Engines](/seo/html-heading-tags-structure.html)

![Document Icon](/images/docblue.gif) [Tag DocBook XML Documents for
Search Engine Optimization](/seo/docbook.html)

![Document Icon](/images//newwin.gif) [Check Out Google's Search Engine
Optimization Starter
Guide](http://www.google.com/webmasters/docs/search-engine-optimization-starter-guide.pdf)

Last Updated: Oct. 21, 2011. First Published: Oct. 21, 2011.


















