---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: 
	Criticism.com needs your help to continue publishing commentary that counters the neoliberal mantra, exposes unjust public policies, and persuades readers to take progressive action. Criticism.com combines critical theory with concise commentary to analyze public policy.
keywords: 
	critical theory, media criticism, media theory, seo, search engine optimization, progressive policies
title: A Campaign for Critical Culture
---




Lend Your Support to Criticism of Neoliberal Policies
-----------------------------------------------------

With conservative billionaires funneling millions of dollars into ad
hoc advocacy groups, fake institutes, and shrill bloggers, the time is
now to promote progressive voices.

On the Internet, liberal opinion is overwhelmed by the volume of
neoliberal messages -- crude but totalizing mantras, shrouded in
American myths and middle-class fears, endlessly repeated by a compliant
media until they become axiomatic.

Only in the past year have progressives managed to raise the volume in
the public sphere. The Occupy movement has brought dissenting voices
into the open.

But it is time to do more. While conservatives are funding armies of
bloggers and the mass media is carrying their messages without critical
enquiry, progressive causes are silenced by a lack of sponsorship,
making it difficult to compete for public opinion. Despite the success
of the Occupy movement, in the wake of Citizens United the influence of
progressives on the Internet and in the media is waning faster than
ever. Workers are losing their voices, consumers their conscience,
writers their livelihood.

Criticism.com needs your help so it can publish commentary that counters
the neoliberal mantra, critiques unjust public policies, and persuades
readers to take progressive action.




### The Power of SEO

Criticism.com is in a unique position to put forth the ideals of social
and economic justice. Since 1996, it has disseminated the ideas of
writers like Foucault, Barthes, Saussure, Bakhtin, Horkheimer, and
others, often in language that's accessible to all readers and useful in
a variety of educational contexts.

Google ranks many of Criticism.com's pages highly. Search for Max Weber,
and Criticism.com's discussion of his approach to objectivity in social
science is in the top 10 or 20 results -- an important result given that
thinking clearly about the fact-value paradigm can help expose faulty
conservative views that are projected as bipartisan. Criticism.com's
article on [Saussure's sign](/md/the_sign.html) is also in the top 10,
as are several other essays on [media criticism](/md/), media theory,
and discourse analysis.






### A Foundation for Critical Culture

Criticism.com combines critical theory with concise commentary to
analyze public policy through the ideas of Karl Marx, Herbert Marcuse,
Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, Michel Foucault, [Roland
Barthes](/md/media-criticism-with-french-social-thought.html), Raymond
Williams, Noam Chomsky, [Douglas Kellner](/md/kellner.html), Marshall
Berman, and others. Criticism.com's publicly accessible social criticism
is informed by a perspective that is itself under pressure of melting
into air. In an age when a cultural heritage and its outlets -- books,
newspapers, philosophy departments -- are fading, social criticism based
loosely on critical theory and promoted through new media helps keep an
important interpretive tradition alive.






### Agenda: From Theory to Practice

Criticism.com embraces critical theory's historical ideal of human
emancipation and freedom from domination. The political ramifications
are obvious: Working to put in place systems of participatory democracy
governed by self-rule and economic systems governed by the principles of
social justice.

Criticism.com also backs the mission of the Congressional Progressive
Caucus, which was, according to its founding statement of purpose,
"organized around the principles of social and economic justice, a
non-discriminatory society, and national priorities which represent the
interests of all people, not just the wealthy and powerful." Indeed,
perhaps the most important goal is to reshape the economic system to
serve everyone, not just the rich. The norm must become broad-based
prosperity, supported by a social safety net, especially universal
health care. An immediate objective is stopping tax breaks for the rich
that are paid for by cutting services for everyone else.

There are related ideas that Criticism.com addresses: Empathy and
kindness as practices of resistance; re-evaluating ideas that are
uncritically adopted from the system in which we are embedded; substance
over image; literature as social knowledge; the dialogic voice and the
dialogic imagination; inclusion over ritual exclusion; integration over
dispossession; freedom from the iron cage and the silicon cage through
economic justice; organic social interaction in the village-like
neighborhoods of the inner city; media criticism of uncritical support
for neoliberal policies.






### Making Connections

Marx urged his readers to make critical connections -- to connect the
structural transformations of the public sphere that were taking place
with the rise of capitalism and modernization. [Weber](/md/weber1.html),
too, made connections between modernization and social forces. In the
continental tradition of critical journalism, the practice of critical
theory can yield web pages -- editorials, essays, book reviews -- that
appear in an expanding digital landscape of interconnected, multifaceted
voices calling for human emancipation and freedom from domination.Â ![End
Icon](/images/endbox.gif)

*-- Steve Hoenisch*

**Related**

<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [An Analysis of Kellner's Theory
of Media Culture](/md/kellner.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Max Weber's View of Objectivity
in Social Science](/md/weber1.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Saussure's
Sign](/md/the_sign.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Media Criticism](/md/)

<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> [Using French Social Thought for
Media Criticism](/md/media-criticism-with-french-social-thought.html)

First Published: July 20, 2012. Last Updated: July 17, 2017.


