---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    Citations of criticism.com. Comments and feedback on criticism.com, a
    site by Steve Hoenisch covering Social Science and Media Criticism.
keywords: |
    Max Weber, Steve Hoenisch, Criticism.com, criticism, media criticism,
    Wittgenstein, Freud, Objectivity, Social Science, Media Culture
title: 'What Others Are Saying About Criticism.Com'
---

1 Robert D. Putnam Cites Essay on Weber
===========================================



Robert D. Putnam, Professor of Public Policy at Harvard University,
writes the following in Perspective on Politics (2003, 1:249-255
American Political Science Association). The paper is a slightly
expanded version of his presidential address at the 2002 APSA annual
meeting ():





> Because our discipline, more than any other social science, gives a
> place of honor to explicit, reasoned debate about normative issues, we
> have an unusual potential to frame issues that inevitably straddle the
> fact-value boundary. To do publicly engaged political science, we have
> to be prepared to be boundarycrossers in this sense. Our values
> powerfully influence what we choose to study, as well as our policy
> recommendations, and in that sense our work is intrinsically
> value-laden. On the other hand, our investigation of the facts can and
> should be governed by objective rules. In that sense, I agree with Max
> Weber's view, as synthesized in a fine recent essay by Steve Hoenisch:
> “Science and politics are, for Weber, not mutually exclusive; rather,
> they are mutually inclusive.” 10





*Citation:* HoenischSteve. n.d. Max Weber's view of objectivity in
social science Available at
[www.criticism.com/md/weber1.html](http://www.criticism.com/md/weber1.html).
Accessed 18 March 2003











2 Weber Essay Named Best of the Web for Social Science
==========================================================



In 2003, [Encyclopaedia Britannica](http://www.britannica.com/) named
[Max Weber's View of Objectivity](md/weber1.html) best of the web for
social science.











3 Weber Essay Cited by Wikipedia and Encyclopaedia Britannica
=================================================================



[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Weber#External_links) has
cited Max Weber's View of Objectivity in Social Science as an external
link, and [Encyclopaedia
Britannica](http://www.britannica.com/search?query=max+weber&ct=) has
cited it in its entry for Max Weber under the banner of "The Web's Best
Sites."











4 New York Public Library
=============================



The [New York Public Library](http://www.nypl.org/index.html) lists
Criticism.com among best of the web for media theory and criticism. See
[New York Public Library: Media Theory and
Criticism](http://www.nypl.org/links/index.cfm?Trg=1&d1=2212&d3=Media%20Theory%20and%20Criticism).











5 Wikipedia cites essay on indeterminacy
============================================



Wikipedia's entry for
[indeterminacy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indeterminacy_(Philosophy))
cites [Interpretation and Indeterminacy in Discourse
Analysis](http://www.criticism.com/da/da_indet.html).











6 Humbul Humanities Hub at the University of Oxford
=======================================================



"Criticism.com is a massive site dedicated to discussion of the new
media. A gateway, a propaganda tool and a journal, Criticism.com is a
two-tier project combining the best in academic (theoretical) writing
and journalism. The editor, Steve Hoenisch, is committed to a site that
has a form in keeping with the nature of the Internet. As a result,
Criticism.com can be used as a door to a labyrinth of sound-bites or as
a more serious aid to theoretical reflection on the new technology and
the its implications for culture. At once irreverent and passionate,
Criticism.com will appeal to those working in culture, theory and
philosophy." View [complete
listing](http://www.humbul.ac.uk/output/full2.html?id=2033).





The Humbul Humanities Hub is a service of the Resource Discovery Network
funded by the Joint Information Systems Committee, the Arts and
Humanities Research Board, and is hosted by the University of Oxford.











7 Oxford University Press Textbook Includes Link to Weber Essay
===================================================================



In the companion site for *Introduction to International Relations*, 2d
Edition, published by Oxford University Press, authors Jackson and
Sorenson include a link to [Max Weber's View of
Objectivity](md/weber1.html) as a reading in "explaining vs.
understanding." See
[http://www.oup.co.uk/oxfordtextbooks/](http://www.oup.co.uk/oxfordtextbooks/politics/jacksonsorensen2e/weblinks/ch09/).
(2005)











8 Oxford University Press Campanion Includes Link to Wittgenstein Essay
===========================================================================



Here's what the Oxford University Press Companion Web Site says:





"For the more theoretically minded amongst you, this essay \[A
[Wittgensteinian approach](da/lw_da.html) to discourse analysis\]
discusses the impact that the philosophical ideas of Wittgenstein have
had upon the development of DA \[discourse analysis\]. It is written by
Steven M. Hoenisch and forms part of a web site on critical theory;
however, this is an accessible and user-friendly piece to read and may
help you to understand some of the linguistic principles that inform
DA." (2006)





See [http://www.oup.com/uk/booksites/content/0199264465/student/links/ch17](http://www.oup.com/uk/booksites/content/0199264465/student/links/ch17).



9 Towson University's Reading List for Media Literacy Includes Essay on French Thought
==========================================================================================



[Towson University](http://wwwnew.towson.edu/medialiteracy/reading.htm)
includes [Using French Social Thought for Media
Criticism](http://www.criticism.com/md/media-criticism-with-french-social-thought.html)
on its reading list for establishing media literacy in post-communist
universities.











10 A Note from Teun A. van Dijk
===================================



Dear Steve: By accident I hit on your criticism.com page (searching for
sociolinguistics bibliography), and see it has not been updated since
December last year. Are you still doing this? \[*Yes, I'm still working
on criticism.com, but sometimes I get sidetracked with other work --
Steve.*\]





Given your aims, are you aware of or interested in including work,
references, bibliographies in critical discourse analysis (see also my
website \[at
[www.discourse-in-society.org](http://www.discourse-in-society.org)\]
and the attached short list of books)?





For the spanish speaking worlds we just founded a new journal on the
internet in which critical studies will be published: DISCURSO &
SOCIEDAD ([www.dissoc.org](http://www.dissoc.org)). Best wishes,





Teun A. van Dijk, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Dept. de Traducció i
Filologia





December 2005.











11 Weber, Charles Sanders Pierce, and Intersubjectivity
===========================================================



Hi Steve,





I have had a great time reading your site. We share a number of
interests. I found you googling XML Editors. I am about to review the
top 8 or so for the June issue of EContent (from a list of 70 products
listed at CMS Review).





As to Weber, he knew we all have values. The need is to get them out in
public to help us achieve what Charles Sanders Pierce called the
"intersubjective agreement" of a community of (properly skeptical and
truly open-minded) inquirers.





This intersubjectivity of thinkers with open declarations of their
values is about as close as science can come to objectivity in social
science.





Physical science is another matter, since there is a physical world out
there with unchanging characteristics to be discovered, independent in
itself of our cultures.





-- Bob Doyle





Editor In Chief, CMS Review - 





Technology Adviser, CM Pros - 





Contributing Editor, EContent Magazine -






President and CEO, skyBuilders - 





March 2006.











12 Related Site on Media, Culture, and Simulation
=====================================================



I just read your review of Kellner's book and I wanted to alert you to a
site on the Internet that deals with media, culture, and simulation. The
title of the site is Transparency. Its goal is to make culture and
personality transparent to the view and understanding of readers. The
sections include "The Age of Simulation", "Image and Action:
Deconstructing the News", and "The Landscape of Fiction."





The site has been used in numerous classrooms and received strong
comment from around the Internet. You can access a page on that at the
bottom of the home page titled "What's Being Said."





Since I don't have time to give you a good overview of what the site is
about, I am including a brief item on [The Truman Show](md/film1.html)
that was published as a letter-to-the-editor in Salon magazine, which
summarizes one aspect of the theory. If you examine the site, I believe
you will find it significantly expands the range of ideas on the role of
power, "illusion", and unconscious meaning in contemporary culture. --
Ken Sanes





See [http://www.transparencynow.com/](http://www.transparencynow.com/).











13 "Objectivity Is a Value"
===============================



\[[Weber's View of Objectivity in Social Science](md/weber1.html) is\] a
very nice paper. I wish I could remember the Weber commemorative
journal, but Portis and others were in it. The best piece was by Guy
Oakes, a philosopher at Monmouth College. He also has several
outstanding books on Weber's methodological writings. In your piece I
just don't see an explicit recognition that objectivity is a value! The
Western University stands out and is historically unique for trying to
restrict itself to knowledge that is true for everyone and for all time
as a goal. This provides us with a "perspective" on all other claims.
Ultimately valid, no. With an interesting set of consequences, yes. It
does allow for an unusual development of power over nature. Is this what
life is all about? -- David Whitney











14 "Oasis"
==============



I am most impressed by your writing. There is such an abundance of
triviality on the Web, your various writings are a delightful oasis.
Bravo! I should like to bring to your attention the following literary
Web site: . It has the impetuosity of
an attaque à outrance, yet is not devoid of subtlety, and
thought-provoking audacity. Long live rebels! If inspired, e-mail your
reaction. -- Guido Cavalcanti











15 On Freud and Wittgenstein
================================



Did you read Donald Levy's recent book, Freud Among the Philosophers? He
builds a cogent case against Wittgenstein. You may be interested. -- Jon
Mills






