---
title: 'In a Flash, Vivid Memories of Marburg'
---



**By Steve Hoenisch**




Memories of places come back to me in a nostalgic flash. It's strange,
sometimes, that I've been to so many [places](/cc/): The other day a
friend mentioned the Fashion Institute of Technology, and immediately a
vivid picture of it comes to me. I've walked past it so many times, I've
stood on the corner of 7th Avenue and W. 26th, coffee in hand, watching
Manhattan pass before me.

The same thing happens with movies: I see a scene that was shot on
location and, often, I not only identify the place but instantly conjure
up vivid memories of being there. And not just movies filmed in New
York, either, but movies filmed just about anywhere in the United States
or England: the scenes of Brighton in Wimbledon, the footage of Boston's
Chinatown in The Departed, the streets of my beloved Williamsburg and
Greenpoint in Romeo is Bleeding. It is precisely because of their
ability to trigger vivid memories that I so like movies with a strong
sense of place.

There, too, are the memories that come back to me without trigger,
memories of those moments when you are at once self-aware and
world-aware, the moments that you remember forever because in that
instant you saw yourself in the world from on high, as though you were
in an airplane, calm, and looking down on the heaths near Crawley, you
see yourself there and your whole life unfolds in a flood of memories.

That happened to me in Marburg. On a crisp autumn morning, while the fog
was dissipating and the sun beginning to warm the village, I set out on
a run, heading to the trails on the east edge of town and then following
one that skirts a farm. The horses are there, and I stop and talk to
them. They come closer. I remember every place I've been, and together
we are at peace.

----
