---
description:
    Notes on culture, policy, psychology, sociology, philosophy, economics, literature, and criticism.
keywords:
    criticism, sociology, psychology, media criticism, Max Weber, Karl Marx, Foucault
title: 'Critic''s Notebook'
---



<i class="fa fa-university" aria-hidden="true"></i> **Culture.Policy.Criticism**


<i class="fa fa-random" aria-hidden="true"></i> Connecting the dots with random notes on culture, society, policy, psychology, sociology, philosophy,
economics, literature, technology, and criticism. 

<i class="fa fa-user-secret" aria-hidden="true"></i> By Steve Hoenisch




### The End of Critical Culture

From about 1990 through about 2005, it was common to suggest the end of
one cultural sphere or another -- the end of history being the beginning
of it all. And, finally, Gore's The Assault on Reason being the end of it
all, showing how conservatives adopted angles of post-modernist thought to turn
politics away from truth. Now it's a permanent condition of fantasy over
reality, ideology over evidence.

But after spending the last decade reading obituary after obituary in
The Nation, Harper's, and (more literally) National Geographic, I feel
like it's also the end of culture. We've lost newspapers, books,
critical ideas, progressive ideals, and finally, after Obama, we've even
lost all hope. But I keep lamenting the disappearance of a cultural
movement dear to me, critical theory. I can't even find anyone to talk
with anymore. Everyone I meet is entranced by junk food, junk media,
junk things, and junky ideas.






### How to Live Now: A Practice

Try to eat only local, organic foods. Kill your television: Watch no TV.
Watch no movies, especially cgi; make exceptions for art house cinema,
independent documentaries, or other independent films. Play no video
games. Make nature paramount. Stop trying to impose control over nature.

Avoid going shopping. Never go to a chain store or a chain restaurant.
Build community in your neighborhood. Throw your cell phone out the
window. No, really: Stop talking on the phone so much. Instead, meet
with people face to face.

Be kind. In the face of a neoliberal world, the piece de resistance is
kindness, or maybe empathy. Practice progressive politics. The key word
here is **practice**. Practice resistance. Stop living a fantasy of
wealth and privilege that endeavors to sanitize and disneyize the world
around you. Don't be a skimmer: Don't exploit others or other people's
resources or natural resources for extravagant personal gain.

Go to the park. Radically reduce the amount of stimulation you need from
external sources, such as media, other than people, movement, or nature.
Live close to nature. Don't putt around the house: Go outside. Emphasize
the visceral, the intellectual, the social, and the interactional. Read
critical theory. Or philosophy. Learn to think sociologically.

Practice empathy. Understand the role of fantasy in American society. At
all costs, stay out of the suburbs. Understand the interconnectedness of
dominance and vanity in American society. Understand the effects of
neoliberalism and the tacit role of neoliberal thought in the choices
that you make. Don't allow your friendships to become transactional.
Develop your own ethical framework to guide your decisions and actions.
Realize that most acts -- especially your behavior as a consumer -- are
political.

In some way, lead a classical life -- meaning: Listen to classical
music, read Russian literature. Find a way to partake in a timeless
pursuit, an activity that transcends the cultural moment in which you
are embedded. In fact, try to transcend the dominant, monologic
discourse of the culture in which you are embedded and stop uncritically
adopting ideas just because you are repeatedly exposed to them or
conditioned by them or because the ideas are generally accepted or
repeated ad nauseam in the mainstream media.

Stop driving so fucking much. Advocate for change.

(Added on March 13, 2012.)






### Moral Zombies

I've always seen the dominant import of Paul Bowles's work to be
psychological and thus less related to the Beat writers than others
think. There is certainly a strong modernist aspect to it, but perhaps
there is also a dark moral undertone to The Sheltering Sky that, it
seems, has fully come to be.

Part of the reason that works like The Sheltering Sky lend themselves so
well to selective interpretation is that they are deeply nuanced,
multifaceted pieces that change their shape every time you look at them
from a different angle, or a different era. Because of their complexity
and ambiguity, they can be subjected to a variety of interpretations,
including the possibility of parallel interpretations that seemingly
conflict.

It's clear to me, though, that after looking at The Sheltering Sky
again, it shows what can happen to your interpersonal relationships,
your inner state, your health, and your personal freedom when you set
out on a journey as a narcissist looking for an exotic adventure: The
characters' fascination with and pursuit of the exotic exposes them to
psychological and even physical terror; their individualism destroys
their friendships and their love; their spoiled, narcissistic nature is
reflected back onto them by the empty space as nihilism. The book is
brilliant because it lures in the reader with an intimate sense of
exotic adventure only to slowly reveal a dark psychological underside
that exemplifies what can happen to individuals who slide into moral
nihilism. In [a book review in The New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/05/17/specials/bowles-sheltering.html),
Tennessee Williams put it like this in 1949:

>In this external aspect the novel is, therefore, an account of startling adventure. In its interior aspect, "The Sheltering Sky" is an allegory of the spiritual adventure of the fully conscious person into modern experience. This is not an enticing way to describe it. It is a way that might suggest the very opposite kind of a novel from the one that Paul Bowles has written. ... 

>I suspect that a good many people will read this book and be enthralled by it without once suspecting that it contains a mirror of what is most terrifying and cryptic within the Sahara of moral nihilism, into which the race of man now seems to be wandering blindly.

Now, in 2011, we've seen what's become of people when they persist as
moral zombies. What are the social consequences that result from moral
nihilism's political equivalent?

In One Dimensional Man, Herbert Marcuse points toward an answer. The
book is especially poignant because passages like the following relate
so closely to what's happening how, with the full-on attack on social
programs and collective bargaining through the repetition of certain
mantras:

>One-dimensional thought is systematically promoted by the makers of politics and their purveyors of mass information. Their universe of discourse is populated by self-validating hypotheses which, incessantly and monopolistically repeated, become hypnotic definitions or dictations. 

Will the House's attack on workers, health care, and women's health,
including the attempt to defund Planned Parenthood, prompt large
protests here? Why isn't there a mass protest movement in this country?

(Added on June 27, 2011.)






### Monolithic Movement

The political and economic change so sorely needed in the United States
requires nothing short of a unified, monolithic movement that repeatedly
takes to the streets en masse -- nothing else will work, as the abject
failure -- hope for change is lost -- of the Obama administration makes
patently clear.


### From Moral Nihilism to Bourgeois Narcissisism

So, why is there no mass protest movement? Especially among "hipsters"? 


### Empathy Crisis

There's an empathy crisis in the United States. The utter lack of
empathy I find in so many of the people I meet troubles me. Sometimes I
catch myself trying to gauge -- or even test -- a person's capacity for
it. Empathy, quite clearly, conflicts with our society's penchant for
predatory capitalism. Is the economic system, by necessity, pushing out
empathy? It has certainly done so, it seems to me, in many businesses
and work places. But is it also pushing empathy out of interpersonal
relationships? In such a climate, empathy and kindness become practices
of
[resistance](http://www.criticism.com/md/kellner.html#section-The-Place-of-Resistance-in-a-Corporate-Media-Culture):
They are human and humane acts that undermine structures of dominance
and exploitation. As practices, kindness and empathy reorient us toward
a good society. In a time when bourgeois nihilism has given way to
bourgeois narcissism, they are, it seems, emotional acts that are
parallel, at least on the level of interpersonal relationships, to the
intellectual's responsibility to speak out against social injustice, as
captured by this quote from a piece by William Deresiewicz:

> Yet there is a dimension of the intellectual life that lies above the
> passion for ideas, though so thoroughly has our culture been sanitized
> of it that it is hardly surprising if it was beyond the reach of even
> my most alert students. Since the idea of the intellectual emerged in
> the 18th century, it has had, at its core, a commitment to social
> transformation. Being an intellectual means thinking your way toward a
> vision of the good society and then trying to realize that vision by
> speaking truth to power. It means going into spiritual exile. It means
> foreswearing your allegiance, in lonely freedom, to God, to country,
> and to Yale. It takes more than just intellect; it takes imagination
> and courage.

--From [The Disadvantages of an Elite
Education](http://www.theamericanscholar.org/the-disadvantages-of-an-elite-education/),
by William Deresiewicz.

(Added on June 21, 2011.)






### Connecting the Ambivalence of the Past with the Ambiguity of the Present

Patrick Leigh Fermo's A Time of Gifts ('77) and Between the Woods and
the Water ('86) are seminal books that may have partially inspired a
subthesis in Bruce Chatwin's The Songlines ('87) -- that to be human is
to walk through nature. Saul Bellow seems to extend it in a modern and
uniquely American way: that to be human is to go out into the streets,
to walk the back alleys of the city. (Dostoyevsky seems to do the same
in a uniquely Russian way, and I'm sure there are various other
variations on this theme.)

I love this passage from a book review of Bellow's letters by
Deresiewicz in a recent issue of The Nation:

> And though Augie is a naif and Henderson a lout, the classic Bellovian
> heroes, the figures at the center of his most mature and
> characteristic works, are like their creator: notion-spinners,
> sensitive souls, idealists, contemplators, writers all. And while
> Augie and Henderson are perpetual motion machines, the later novels
> enact a more complicated dynamic: Herzog in his hammock; Sammler in
> his bedroom; Charlie Citrine, from Humboldt, on the sofa in his
> high-rise: they start in a condition of removal, of reflection, of
> repose -- safely ensconced, thinking it over, just themselves and the
> Great Books. But here's what's new: their stories drive them out. Into
> the city, into the uproar, into America.

But there is another assessment in the review that is leading me to the
bookstore: "Understanding, for Bellows, begins in feeling -- hardly an
intellectual's position or, these days, even a comprehensible one."

Another review in the same issue of The Nation takes me to a wholly
different book, one that is also a collection of letters and, despite
its differences with the other, seems to touch on a similar theme: It's
"an accidental memoir from a disappearing world," I'm told.

Letters. Two book reviews about collections of letters that have struck
my interest recently. The second book collects the correspondence
between Leigh Fermor and Debo Mitford, a correspondence that is for me
an otherwise uncharacteristic and unlikely interest but I'm finding it
compelling because it spanned half a century and because Leigh Fermor
has a prescient way of connecting the ambivalence of the (personal) past
with the ambiguity of the present. I'm finding such connections
fascinating right now, especially in light of all the cultural
obituaries I've been reading lately, such as those for newspapers and
book publishers.

(Added on July 20, 2011.)






### Thematic Tags

<i class="fa fa-tags"></i> Plutocracy | Universal Health Care | Image over Substance | Travel | Bruce Chatwin | Paul Bowles | Moral Zombies



