---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    Hermogenes over Socrates: Rebuting Socrates's argument that there is a
    relation between a name's form and meaning.
keywords: |
    Cratylus, Socrates, Plato, Hermogenes, Greek philosophy, linguistics,
    language, meaning, philosophy of languague
title: 'Hermogenes Was Right, Socrates Wrong'
---







1 Cratylus: Form and Meaning Are Linked
===========================================



In Harris and Taylor's chapter on Plato's "Cratylus" in Landmarks in
Linguistic Thought, Cratylus takes the position that the form and
meaning of a word are inextricably related. For Cratylus, "everything,"
including Hermogenes, "has a right name of its own, which comes by
nature" even though some people, like Hermogenes, are named incorrectly
(Cratylus 383, as quoted in Harris and Taylor, p. 1).





In contrast, Hermogenes maintains that there is no relation between a
name's form and its meaning. For Hermogenes, names are "correct" merely
by way of convention and agreement. Names are not determined by nature,
nor is one name for a thing more correct than another. To illustrate his
point, Hermogenes notes that the name of a servant can be changed and
that the new name is just as correct as the old.






2 Sophist Rhetorical Trickery
=================================



Socrates, however, enters the argument and, taking the torch from
Cratylus, dismisses Hermogenes' point by a piece of Sophist rhetorical
trickery the likes of which he himself so abhorred in the courts of
Ancient Greece. Socrates asks Hermogenes, "Whatever name we decide to
give to each particular thing is its name?... Whether the giver be a
private person or state?" By putting forth such questions, though,
Socrates entices Hermogenes to agree to a misstatement of his own view.
Specifically, Socrates, in the horse-man example he presents to refute
Hermogenes' view, fails to take into account that Hermogenes originally
said a name is correct by agreement and convention even if it is the
convention of only one person. And by asking the question, "Is there
anything you call speaking the truth and speaking falsehood" (Cratylus
384), Socrates' presentation of Hermogenes' argument, according to
Harris and Taylor, "validates the recognition of as many private
languages as there are individuals" because it "makes nonsense of our
normal understanding of the difference between truth and falsehood"
(1990, p. 5).





While enunciating Socrates' view, Harris and Taylor say that a statement
such as \`A horse has four legs' is taken as true. But under Hermogenes'
position as interpreted by Socrates, it becomes unknown whether such a
statement is true or false because the word "horse" can just as well be
used to denote a man. This is not an accurate summary of Hermogenes'
argument, however, especially if it is examined before Socrates puts it
through a series of rhetorical twists. Hermogenes would hold (and
Socrates probably would too) that the statement, "What we call a horse
has four legs" is true, assuming convention has established that the
word "horse" refers to a four-legged animal.



3 Socrates and Plato on the Relation Between Form and Meaning
=================================================================



As Socrates leads Hermogenes into his argumentative trap of individual
acts and dodges in this way the substance of Hermogenes' original
position, Socrates proceeds to reveal the rest of his view of the
relation between form and meaning.





Specifically, while continuing to labor the point about the
"correctness" of names, Socrates lays the foundation for the theory he
is weaving: "Things have some fixed reality of their own, not in
relation to us, nor caused by us..." (Cratylus 386). (Note that this
view contrasts directly with Saussure's modern conventionalist view that
"Words are not vocal labels which have come to be attached to things and
qualities already given in advance by Nature" \[from Translator's
Introduction to *Cours*, by Harris, p. ix\].) Likewise, actions are also
"performed according to their nature."





Next, as summarized by Harris and Taylor, Socrates argues that speaking
is an action and thus should conform with nature. Therefore, to function
properly, a word must be designed in the right way -- that is, have a
form, or sound, that represents its object in nature as best as possible
-- to distinguish things and actions in the world. For Socrates, the
thing in the world dictates the symbol or sound used to represent it,
making the relation between form and meaning intrinsic. That is, form
follows function. When Socrates' "name giver" assigned a name to the
thing "dog," for example, the name giver knew how to choose the sounds
that most naturally represent the thing.





This leads to the relationship between language, communication and ideas
that is put forth by Plato, largely through the voice of Socrates. Plato
proposes that abstract ideas actually exist in nature. And language,
which is bestowed upon us by nature, is a functional medium. First, it
allows people to conceptualize an idea that closely approximates but can
never match the true ideas or forms given by nature. Second, it allows
people to communicate these ideas to others within a natural framework
established and given to us by nature. As Harris and Taylor note, the
functionality of language implies that form is designed to serve a
purpose -- and that purpose is not only communication, but truthful
communication that accurately represents reality. Thus, again as pointed
out by Harris and Taylor, this functionality also implies a certain
rationality of ideas.







4 Plato's Legacy in Modern Linguistic Thought
=================================================



Plato's rationalism and his universal truths that stem from nature
endure, at least in part, in the modern linguistic theory of Noam
Chomsky. But for Plato's universalism Chomsky substitutes his theory of
universal grammar -- that the knowledge of a linguistic system is
innate. Chomsky's treatment of nomenclaturism, however, departs from
Plato's position. Plato maintains a kind of semantic nomenclaturism in
which the names of things are, in effect, given in advance by nature.
Chomsky, while postulating that certain grammatical concepts are innate,
certainly does not believe that names are given to preexisting concepts
by nature.





Part of Hermogenes' view also survives in modern linguistic theory.
Saussure, for instance, has embodied Hermogenes' theory that attributes
the meaning of names not to their form but to their relation to other
names. Saussure's theory, like Hermogenes', also holds that names are a
matter of social convention -- although Saussure's view goes beyond mere
convention to assert that names are given arbitrarily.





A penumbra of Hermogenes' view also lives on in the behaviorist view of
B.F. Skinner and Leonard Bloomfield. Hermogenes says that "no name
belongs to any particular thing by nature, but only by the habit and
custom of those who employ it..." (Cratylus 384). The behaviorists
similarly believe that language is a habit. Thus hints of Hermogenes'
undeveloped theory survive in both the structuralist and behaviorist
theories.




5 Related
=============



* [Philosophy of Language Questions and
Answers](philosophy-of-language-answers.html)
* [Pragmatic Accounts of Communication](pragmatics-answers.html)




Last updated on Nov. 10, 2005. 

