---
description: Linguistics in the news (2001).
keywords: |
    Computational linguistics, linguistics, Abney, parsing strategies,
    parsers, natural language processing, local ambiguity, language
    processing
title: Linguistics and Cognitive Psychology in the Media
---


1 Scientists Report Finding a Gene for Speech
=================================================



From The New York Times online edition, Oct. 4, 2001:





"A team of geneticists and linguists say they have found a gene that
underlies speech and language, the first to be linked to this uniquely
human faculty.





"The discovery buttresses the idea that language is acquired and
generated by specific neural circuitry in the brain, rather than by
general brain faculties. \[...\]





"The new discovery is described in the Oct. 4, 2001, issue of Nature by
Dr. Anthony P. Monaco of the University of Oxford in England and
colleagues.





"The gene first came to light through study of a large family, half of
whose members have trouble pronouncing words properly, speaking
grammatically and making certain fine movements of the lips and the
tongue. Asked to speak a repetitive sound like "pataca pataca pataca,"
they will stumble over each iteration. Outsiders have trouble
understanding them when they speak, and family members have difficulty
understanding one another. Some of the affected members, though not all,
seem normal otherwise, suggesting that a specific impairment of speech
and language is the root of their problem.





"The new study shows that all the affected members have inherited a
mutation, or variant piece of DNA, in a specific gene. The mutation
affects a single unit in the 6,500 units of DNA that make up the gene.
So delicate is the human genetic programming that this minuscule change
suffices to sabotage the whole faculty of speech and language. \[...\]





"But Dr. Steven Pinker, a linguist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, said that he thought the new gene "shows there is some
innate specialization of the brain for language" and that it provided
"soft support, though not hard support," for Dr. Chomsky's thesis."









------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Multitasking Reduces Productivity
=======================================



From CNN.com, Aug. 6, 2001:





"Multitasking is a managerial buzz-concept these days, a post-layoff
corporate assumption that the few can be made to do the work of many.
But newly released results of scientific studies in multitasking
indicate that carrying on several duties at once may, in fact, reduce
productivity, not increase it.





"In some cases, you could be wasting your employer's time," says
researcher Joshua Rubenstein, Ph.D., formerly of the University of
Michigan and now with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) working
on security issues. "And in certain cases" of multitasking, Rubenstein
says, "you could be risking employers a dangerous outcome."





"In the research behind an article titled "Executive Control of
Cognitive Processes in Task Switching" -- published in August 2001 in
the American Psychological Association's Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance -- Rubenstein and his
associates David Meyer, Ph.D., and Jeffrey Evans, Ph.D., determined that
for all types of tasks, subjects lost time when they had to switch from
one task to another.





"These "time costs" increased with the complexity of the chores: It took
longer, say researchers Rubenstein and Meyer, for subjects to switch
between more complicated tasks."






