---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    Answers to questions in philosophy of language and semantics, covering
    Frege, Grice, Searle, Austin, Wittgenstein, Russel, Kripke, Carnap,
    Strawson, Davidson, Putnam, Kneale, Donnellan, Burge, Millians, and
    Quine.
keywords: |
    Semantics, philosophy of language, meaning, intension, sense, Frege,
    Grice, Searle, Austin, Wittgenstein, Russel, Kripke, Carnap, Strawson,
    Davidson, Putnam, Kneale, Donnellan, Burge, Millians, Quine,
    connotation, denotation
title: 'Philosophy of Language: Questions and Answers'
---

  



**<i class="fa fa-exclamation-triangle" aria-hidden="true"></i> Given the profoundly nuanced thought with which the philosophers below
address the complexities inherent in language, these short answers may
not be complete, or completely accurate. I suggest you address these
questions with the full weight of your own critical thought.**





<i class="fa fa-language" aria-hidden="true"></i> These questions were posed by Prof. Jerry Katz in his course on Philosophy of
Language at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.







------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Frege
===========



1.1 Frege, Kant, and Carnap Define Analyticity
--------------------------------------------------



**Q:** (i) State Kant's definition(s) of analyticity. (ii) State Frege's
definition of analyticity. (iii) State Carnap's definition of
analyticity.





**A:** (i) For Kant, a proposition is analytic when the concept of the
predicate is contained in the concept of the subject. Likewise, Kant
conceived of an analytic statement as one that attributes to its subject
no more than is already conceptually contained in the subject. In other
words, analyticity is when a statement is true by virtue of meanings and
independently of fact.





\(ii) Frege's definition of analyticity is that a proposition is analytic
just in case it follows from the laws of logic plus definitions but
without use of principles from special sciences.





\(iii) Carnap holds that a statement is analytic if it is true by virtue
of the intensions of the expressions occurring in it. More specifically,
Carnap's definition of analyticity is that a statement is analytic when
it comes out true under every state description, which is any exhaustive
assignment of truth values to the atomic, or noncompounded, statements
of the language.







1.2 Frege's Arguments for Sense
-----------------------------------



**Q:** State two of Frege's argument for thinking that there is sense as
well as reference.





**A:** One of Frege's arguments for thinking that words have sense as
well as reference is contained in the examples he gives for referring to
Venus. "The morning star" and "the evening star" both refer to the same
thing, Venus. They do not, however, mean the same thing; that is, they
do not have the same sense. If they did have the same sense, the
statement "the morning star is the morning star" (m=m) and "the morning
star is the evening star" (m=e) would have the same meaning. But (m=m)
is an uninformative, analytic fact about the world, while (m=e) contains
an unobvious, empirical truth about the world. Therefore, Frege says,
two expressions having the same referent do not necessarily have the
same sense.





A second argument that Frege uses to establish that there is sense is
well as reference appeals to the notion of indirect speech -- e.g., when
one speaks about words themselves or their sense or quotes what someone
else said. In other words, Frege says, a mention-use distinction
underlies speech. If there were only reference and no sense, such a view
would leave the difference between direct and indirect speech
unexplained. For example, if someone were to report, "He said the same
thing that all criminals do: 'I did not steal the money,'" Frege would
say that it is clear the words do not have their customary reference but
designate what is usually their sense.





A third argument is that there are expressions -- such as "the least
rapidly convergent series" -- that contain sense without having a
reference. Similarly: names without reference, like "Santa Claus,"
though this is not Frege's example.







1.3 Frege's Argument for Sense and Reference
------------------------------------------------



**Q:** State one of Frege's arguments for thinking that words have a
sense as well as a reference.





**A:** One of Frege's arguments for thinking that words have sense as
well as reference is contained in the examples he gives for referring to
Venus. "The morning star" and "the evening star" both refer to the same
thing, Venus. They do not, however, mean the same thing; that is, they
do not have the same sense. If they did have the same sense, the
statement "the morning star is the morning star" (m=m) and "the morning
star is the evening star" (m=e) would have the same meaning. But (m=m)
is an uninformative, analytic fact about the world, while (m=e) contains
an unobvious, empirical truth about the world. Therefore, Frege says,
two expressions having the same referent do not necessarily have the
same sense.







1.4 "The Morning Star Is the Evening Star"
----------------------------------------------



**Q:** Frege says that in order for there to be a difference in the
cognitive value of a=a and a=b (provided a=b is true) there must be a
difference in the sense of the two statements. What is his argument for
this?





**A:** If the equality of a=b were regarded only in terms of reference,
it would seem that a=b and a=a could not differ in cognitive value. If
the equality of a and b is seen only with regard to what they designate,
the kind of relation expressed would only be that of a thing to itself
-- which does not explain the fact that they differ in cognitive value.
If one persisted, however, and tried to explain the difference in
cognitive value by appealing only to what each term designates, one
would be forced to appeal to the nature of the signs themselves and to
assert a relation between them. The problem with this approach, however,
is that the relation between the signs themselves would hold only to the
extent that they designate something. As such, the things designated by
the signs a and b would be the same thing. And this, Frege argues, is
arbitrary. For in such a case, a=b would no longer refer to the subject
matter and would express no new knowledge. But by a=b we often seek to
express new knowledge. If a=b only by virtue of its sign taken as an
object, or by virtue that it refers to the same thing, the cognitive
value of a=b can not be distinguished from a=a.





The difference in cognitive value, Frege says, can be explained only if
the difference between the signs corresponds to a difference in the mode
of presentation of that which is designated. This mode of presentation
can surface only if it is contained in the sense of the sign, Frege
argues. Thus one can explain how a=b differs in cognitive value from a=a
only by appeal to sense.





To repeat all this in another way: Here's what's wrong with the notion
that identity is a relation between things or objects in the world:





Consider:
``` {.program}
(1) a=a "the morning star is the morning star"
(2) a=b "the morning star is the evening star"
```





The reference here is the same for each proposition ("the morning star"
and "the evening star" both refer to the same star), yet the signs
meaningfully differ. In other words, both should have the same cognitive
value, but they do not. Thus it cannot be the reference, but the signs
themselves, in which the identify relation resides.





Frege is arguing against thinking about meaning as being an extension of
the object -- that is, reference.





Frege's solution to the morning star-evening star problem is to say that
signs denote objects by their sense, or mode of presentation. Frege
holds sense to be independent from us; it somehow has semantic value.







1.5 Frege vs. Russell on Logical Form
-----------------------------------------



**Q:** Briefly, contrast Frege and Russell's view on the logical form of
sentences like "The present king of France is wise."





**A:** The central difference between Frege's and Russell's view on
sentences like "The present king of France is wise" (S) is that Frege
distinguishes between a presupposition and an assertion while Russell
does not.





In Frege's view, (S) contains a presupposition that the subject, here
*the king of France,* does in fact exist. If Frege's presupposition
condition is not fulfilled, the sentence would not be said to assert
that the present king of France is wise. In fact, Frege would argue, if
the presupposition requirement is not fulfilled, the sentence is neither
true nor false. Further: For Frege, the presupposition is not
automatically contained in the assertion; it does not follow that the
sense of (S) contains the thought that *king* designates something.





Russell, on the other hand, makes no distinction between assertion and
presupposition. A sentence, on Russell's view, is either true or false.
And, he would say, a presupposition requirement like Frege's arises
because Frege confuses the grammatical subject with the logical subject.





On Russell's view, (S) contains 3 separate propositions; one of them is
the logical subject. If any propositional component of a sentence is
false, the whole sentence is false. For example, if a proper noun does
not refer to a single object -- as in (S) -- it is a logically false
proposition. Russell takes a different explanatory track than Frege
becomes he wants to preserve the law of excluded middle in the analysis
of language.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Strawson
==============



2.1 Strawson on the King of France
--------------------------------------



**Q:** What is Strawson's reason for thinking that someone who said "The
present king of France is wise" is not asserting that there is at
present a king of France?





**A:** The reason lies in Strawson's distinction between types and
tokens, or in his words, between a sentence and the use of a sentence.
While for Strawson significance, or meaning, lies with mentioning a
sentence, truth and falsity are a function of the use of a sentence.
Someone who said (in our time) that "The present king of France is wise"
(S) would be merely mentioning the sentence, not actually using it to
make a true or false assertion about the king of France.





Thus, Strawson argues, if someone actually said to you that (S) and
asked whether you thought it was true or false, you would be inclined to
say you thought it was neither. It has, for Strawson, no truth value.
Because there is no such person as the king of france, because it is
about no one, the question of the truth or falsity of the sentence does
not arise.





Cf. Donnellan, in "Reference and Definite Descriptions," who after
distinguishing between the referential and attributive uses of definite
descriptions argues against Strawson that the truth or falsity is
affected differently depending on whether the definite description is
referential or attributive. (See pp. 196-197.)







2.2 Strawson: Russell's Twice Wrong About the King of France
----------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** Strawson thinks that Russell says two false things about the
sentence "The king of France is wise." State both of them.





**A:** Answer: Strawson thinks that Russell would first say that anyone
(now) uttering the sentence "The king of France is wise" (S) would be
making either a true assertion or a false assertion. Second, Russell
would say that part of what the person uttering (S) would be asserting
would be that there at present existed one and only one king of France.
Both of Russell's claims are, Strawson believes, false.







2.3 Russell Confuses Meaning with Mentioning
------------------------------------------------



**Q:** Why does Strawson think Russell wrong to claim that part of what
is asserted when someone asserts "The present king of France is wise" is
that there exists at present one and only one king of France? Is his
reason adequate?





**A:** Russell is wrong to claim that part of the assertion "The present
king of France is wise" (S) entails that there is a "king of France" (D)
because, Strawson argues, Russell has failed to distinguish between a
sentence and the use of a sentence -- that is, between a type and a
token. For Strawson, truth lies with a token and significance, or
meaning, with the type.





Russell says D, though it is the grammatical subject of S, is not the
logical subject of S. Strawson counters that D is not the logical
subject of S. In fact, Strawson says, S is not logically a
subject-predicate sentence at all. Russell fancies that he is talking
about sentences when he is in fact, Strawson says, talking about the use
of sentences.





Meaning is a function of the sentence; referring and truth or falsity
are functions of the use of the sentence. Russell's mistake was that he
thought referring must be meaning. Russell, that is, confused meaning
with mentioning.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Searle
============



3.1 Searle's Distinction Between Regulative and Constitutive Rules
----------------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** State Searle's distinction between regulative rules and
constitutive rules.





**A:** Regulative rules regulate a pre-existing activity, an activity
whose existence is logically independent of the existence of the
regulative rules. Regulative rules characteristically take the form of
imperatives.





Constitutive rules, on the other hand, constitute (and also regulate) an
activity the existence of which is logically dependent on these rules;
that is, constitutive rules create or define a new activity or form of
behavior.





In football, an example of a regulative rule would be the etiquette or
sportsmanship to which opposing players customarily adhere as they play
the game. A constitutive rule would be that a touchdown is scored when a
player crosses the opponents' goal line in possession of the ball while
play is in progress.





Searle's distinction between constitutive and regulative rules is
philosophically significant because, Searle argues, the semantics of
language can be regarded as a series of systems of constitutive rules
and illocutionary acts are acts performed in accordance with these sets
of constitutive rules.







3.2 Searle vs. Kripke on the Semantics of Names
---------------------------------------------------



**Q:** What is Searle's account of the semantics of names? State
Kripke's best argument against Searle's account and explain why you
think it is the best.





**A:** In general, Searle's account of the semantics of names, adopted
in part from Wittgenstein, holds that names are logically connected "in
a loose sort of way" with the characteristics of the object to which
they refer. \[Cf. Wittgenstein's theory of family resemblances in
Philosophical
Investigations.
\]





More specifically, Searle's account of proper names culminates in his
view that it is a necessary fact that a proper name, e.g. Aristotle, has
the "logical sum, inclusive disjunction, of properties commonly
attributed to him." Any individual not having at least some of the
properties attributed to him could not be Aristotle, Searle argues.





Kripke, however, destroys Searle's account of proper names with his
counterfactual of Jonah, which is that all the descriptive information
we have about him -- gleaned from the Biblical story -- turns out to be
false. Yet Jonah nevertheless existed and is referred to.





The Jonah case is the best of Kripke's arguments against Searle because
it is a case in which all the known descriptive information about Jonah
is presumed false. Searle would thus be forced to say --
counterintuitively -- that Jonah did not exist.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Kripke
============



4.1 Kripke on Nixon
-----------------------



**Q:** Give Kripke's best argument for thinking that "Nixon" does not
mean something like "the individual called 'Nixon'." Explain why you
think it is the best of his arguments.





**A:** Kripke's best argument combines his notion that a name is a rigid
designator with the use of possible worlds to distinguish contingent and
necessary truths. First, in Kripke's view, a proper name is a rigid
designator, which means that it designates the same object in every
possible world. The rigidity of 'Nixon' stems from the stipulation that
the token of the proper name \`Nixon' is being used to speak of the same
individual in every possible world.





This leads to the second point, the one that gives Kripke's argument its
greatest force. Once we have stipulated that we are talking about the
same individual in every possible world, it is merely a contingent truth
that Nixon is called \`Nixon.' It is easy to imagine another world in
which Nixon is not called Nixon. Yet it is a necessary truth that the
stipulated individual is Nixon. Given that Nixon is Nixon, he may have
been called something else in another possible world, but he still would
have been the same individual. As Kripke puts it: "It is not the case
that he might not have been Nixon (though he might not have been called
\`Nixon.'" Naming and
Necessity,
p. 49.)





This argument is Kripke's best because it combines the strong intuition
that a proper name is a rigid designator with the powerful logical
device of possible worlds, which can be used to show whether a truth is
contingent or necessary.







4.2 Kripke on the Meaning of "Nixon" and "Godel"
----------------------------------------------------



**Q:** State one of Kripke's arguments against the view that "Godel"
means "discoverer of the incompleteness of arithmetic," and explain why
he thinks that it is wrong to say that 'Nixon' means "the man called
'Nixon.'"





**A:** One of Kripke's arguments against saying that 'Godel' means "the
discoverer of the incompleteness of arithmetic" is that it could turn
out that Godel was in fact not the discoverer of the incompleteness of
arithmetic. Assume that, instead, a man named Schmidt was. Then, under
the cluster-of-descriptions theory against which Kripke is arguing, when
someone says 'Godel' was "the discoverer of the incompleteness of
arithmetic," he is in fact referring to Schmidt -- because Schmidt is
the unique person satisfying the description. The only problem, of
course, is that he is referring not to Schmidt but to Godel. The example
devastates the logic of the description theory; see Naming and
Necessity, p. 84. A proper name, as Kripke's Godel-Schmidt example
demonstrates, does not mean any properties or descriptions associated
with the name.





Kripke thinks it's wrong to say that 'Nixon' means the man called
'Nixon' for similar reasons. In Kripke's view, a proper name is a rigid
designator, which means that it designates the same object in every
possible world. The rigidity of 'Nixon' stems from the stipulation that
the token of the proper name 'Nixon' is being used to speak of the "same
contextually specified individual in every possible world," as Katz
summarizes it in "Names without Bearers" (p. 14-15).





Once we have stipulated that we are talking about the same individual in
every possible world, it is merely a contingent truth that Nixon is
called 'Nixon.' Another world in which Nixon is not called 'Nixon' can
easily be imagined. Yet it is a necessary truth that the stipulated
individual is Nixon. Given that Nixon is Nixon, he may have been called
something else in another possible world, but he still would have been
the same individual. As Kripke puts it: "It is not the case that he
might not have been Nixon (though he might not have been *called*
'Nixon'" Naming and
Necessity,
p. 49).







4.3 Kripke Contra Kneale
----------------------------



**Q:** Kneale thought it "obviously trifling" to tell someone that
Socrates is called Socrates, and he thought this a reason to think that
"Socrates" means "The individual called 'Socrates'." Kripke does not
agree it is a good reason. Why?





**A:** Kripke thinks
``` {.program}
1. Socrates may not have been called Socrates, etc.
2. Socrates in Greek may be different 
from Socrates in English.
```





It's wrong to say that 'Nixon' means the man called 'Nixon' for similar
reasons. In Kripke's view, a proper name is a rigid designator, which
means that it designates the same object in every possible world. The
rigidity of 'Nixon' stems from the stipulation that the token of the
proper name 'Nixon' is being used to speak of the "same contextually
specified individual in every possible world," as Katz summarizes it in
"Names without Bearers." \[p. 14-15.\]





Once we have stipulated that we are talking about the same individual in
every possible world, it is merely a contingent truth that Nixon is
called 'Nixon.' Another world in which Nixon is not called 'Nixon' can
easily be imagined. Yet it is a necessary truth that the stipulated
individual is Nixon. Given that Nixon is Nixon, he may have been called
something else in another possible world, but he still would have been
the same individual. As Kripke puts it: "It is not the case that he
might not have been Nixon (though he might not have been *called*
'Nixon'" (Naming and Necessity, p. 49).







4.4 Undesirable Consequences of Kripke's Referential Account of Names
-------------------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** Kripke thinks that names do not have a sense -- and he has an
account of how they are used referentially in spite of having no sense.
Can you think of any undesirable consequence of his view about names
that cannot be handled on his account of how they are used
referentially?





**A:** Kripke's referential account of names presents at least three
undesirable consequences. It fails to resolve conundrums posed by
negative existential statements, identity, and substitution in opaque
contexts. I expand on each in turn below.





First, Kripke's referential account of names leaves the meaning of
negative existential statments like "Santa Claus does not exist" (S)
unexplained. If names, as Kripke believes, have no sense but only
reference, then (S) would be meaningless. Yet (S) is meaningful and is
no doubt used frequently during December to express true statements
about the world.





The problem carries even more weight philosophically when, for instance,
Kripke's account of names is pressed into formulating an athiestic
position, for how could Kripke assert within his referential theory of
names that "God does not exist"?





A second undesirable consequence of Kripke's theory is that it fails to
demonstrate why "Mark Twain is Mark Twain" (m=m) is a trivial truth,
while "Mark Twain is Samual Clemens" (m=s) is an unobvious, informative
truth about the world. In other words, the problem of identity remains.
The (m=s) example lends support to the view that even names can have
some degree of sense, even if it isn't the discriptive content which
Kripke dispenses through his powerful counterfactuals.





A third undesirable consequence is that Kripke's referential account of
names leaves unresolved the problem of opaque contexts. In other words,
if, as Kripke claims, names have semantic value only in terms of their
reference, how can Kripke account for
``` {.program}
1. (T) Lois Lane believes Superman flies
2. (F) Lois Lane believes Clark Kent flies
```





where 1. is true and 2. is false even though they refer to the same
bearer?





Yet if Kripke's approach fails to deal in a straightforward way with the
above three cases -- negative existential statements, identity, and
substitution in opaque contexts -- we have a deeper problem. For even
though Kripke cannot adequately handle these cases within his
referential theory, we must grant that he, with his counterfactuals, has
demonstrated that names are not synonymous with the descriptions or
properties of traditional intensionalist theory. Thus the failure of
Kripke's theory to deal adequately with the above three cases entails an
unfortunate result for the philosophy of language: How to account for
the meaning of names -- and even such intuitions about their sense that
arise from (m=s) above -- without on the one hand requiring that they
carry descriptive content and without saying, on the other hand, that
they have meaning only if they have a bearer.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 Donnellan
===============



5.1 Donnellan on Analytic Sentences
---------------------------------------



**Q:** Donnellan says the following: "Given present circumstances, the
correct thing to say is that all whales are mammals. But whether this
is, as we intend it, a necessary truth or contingent is indeterminate."
What is his reason for thinking it indeterminate?





**A:** Donnellan's reason for thinking it indeterminate is that our
present use of such an analytic sentence, while correct now, should not
be expected to hold for all hypothetical cases. It is true that, at
present, whales are mammals. But whether this is an analytic or a
contingent truth is indeterminate because the decision rests upon our
being able to predict the outcome of all hypothetical cases, and this we
cannot do. In other words, the criteria of the application of the term
*mammal* to the total possible class of whales is indeterminate and thus
not permanently fixed in advance of possible further empirical
discoveries.







5.2 "Whales Are Mammals"
----------------------------



What is Donnellan's basic reason for thinking that an alleged analytic
sentence like "Whales are mammals" does not express a necessary truth?





Donnellan's basic reason is that our present use of such an analytic
sentence, while correct now, should not be expected to hold for all
hypothetical cases. It is true that, at present, whales are mammals. But
whether this is an analytic or a contingent truth is indeterminate
because the decision rests upon our being able to predict the outcome of
all hypothetical cases, and this we cannot do. In other words, the
criteria of the application of the term "mammal" to the total possible
class of whales is indeterminate and thus not permanently fixed in
advance of possible further empirical discoveries.





Donnellan has other, related reasons why "whales are mammals" is not
analytic, the primary one being that one must either be taught or learn,
perhaps from a dictionary, that a whale is a mammal.







5.3 Can Millians Be Atheists?
---------------------------------



**Q:** Do Millians like Donnellan and Kripke have a problem in
formulating the claim of atheism? If so, what is it? Can it be overcome?





**A:** Yes, such Millians as Donnellan and Kripke do have a problem in
formulating the claim of atheism. The problem stems from their direct
reference account of meaning. In the Millian view, proper names have
denotation, but not connotation. Thus, since for Millians a name
acquires its semantic value solely from its referent, Millians cannot
explain the meaning of negative existential statements and other
statements in which the referent is uncertain. For example, the
sentence, "God does not exist" poses a problem for Millians because on
their account, since the referent of "God" is uncertain, they cannot
explain how the sentence nevertheless has meaning, as it intuitively
does. Millians would be forced to say the sentence has no meaning when
in fact it does.





The problem can be overcome only by introducing a notion of sense into
the Millians' theory. By introducing sense, the direct reference theory,
of course, collapses into a broader account of meaning, one that
reconciles the strong intuitions of the Millians -- that proper names
derive meaning not from the descriptions or properties associated with
them -- with the power that the notion of sense gives a theory in
accounting for such problems as negative existential statements. The
trick is that the notion of sense must be construed so narrowly that it
does not associate a name with descriptive properties of the bearer. One
possibility, expounded by Katz, would be to define the sense of an
expression as *the aspect of its structure that determines its sense
properties.* On this view, the sense of a proper noun would have the
form The thing which is a bearer of \`N'. The theory, that is, must be a
pure metalinguistic one.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

6 Putnam
============



6.1 Putnam's Twin Earth Argument
------------------------------------



**Q:** What is Putnam's Twin Earth argument that meanings are not in the
head (or that my Doppelganger on Twin Earth and I here cannot both have
the word *water* with the same meaning?





**A:** Putnam's Twin Earth counterfactual argues that the extension of
the term *water* in the idiolect of my Doppelganger on Twin Earth is
different from the extension of the term *water* in the idiolect of me
here. For example, on Earth I can point to a particular liquid, composed
of H20, and call it *water.* Meanwhile, my doppelganger on Twin Earth
can point to a similar liquid -- one used in the same ways on Twin Earth
and having the same superficial properties as water on Earth but
composed of XYZ, not H20 -- and call it *water.* Yet, by the
scientifically determined nature of water on Earth, the liquid on Twin
Earth, when a sample of it is brought back to Earth, will not be
*water.* The extensions of the two words are different, and hence they
have different meanings. Otherwise, upon returning to Earth with the
water sample for Twin Earth, we would find ourselves in the paradoxical
situation of saying that, based on its superficial descriptive
properties, it is water while, because it is not H2O, it is not water.





Putnam's Twin Earth argument further shows that the sense of the term
*water* is not enough alone to fix the extension of the natural kind
term because the extension of the term is determined by a scientific
appeal to the natural world. Thus, extension, Putnam says, is not
determined by psychological state. The meaning of natural kind terms is
not in the head.







6.2 Putnam and Burge on Meaning as Psychological State
----------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** Why does Putnam think that knowing the meaning of a word is not
just a matter of being in a certain psychological state? What does Burge
add to Putnam's conclusions? What might be said against their position?
What side are you on? Explain.





**A:** Putnam believes that knowing the meaning of a word is not just a
matter of being in a certain psychological state because, as he
demonstrates with the help of his Twin Earth water counterfactual in
"The Meaning of Meaning," it is possible for two speakers to be in
exactly the same psychological state even though the extension of the
term "water" in the idiolect of the one is different from the extension
of the term "water" in the idiolect of the other. For example, on Earth
I can point to a particular liquid, composed of H20, and call it
"water." Meanwhile, my doppelganger on Twin Earth can point to a similar
liquid -- one used in the same ways on Twin Earth as water is on Earth
but composed of XYZ, not H20 -- and call it "water." Yet, by the
scientifically determined nature of water on Earth, the liquid on Twin
Earth, when a sample of it is brought back to Earth, will not be
"water."





Putnam's example shows that the sense of the term "water" is not enough
alone to fix the extension of the natural kind term because the
extension of term is determined by a scientific appeal to the natural
world. Thus, extension, Putnam says, is not determined by psychological
state. Meaning is not in the head.





Burge takes Putnam's argument a step further. While Putnam confines his
argument to natural kind terms, Burge puts forth a counterfactual that
expands the scope of terms for which meanings are not in the head. Burge
believes that his counterfactual of people with arthritis demonstrates
that the meanings of such terms as "arthritis" are not in the head, but
are socially determined. Terms like "brisket," "contract," and
"recession" probably provide analogous cases, Burge says.







6.3 Cats Ain't Necessarily Animals
--------------------------------------



**Q:** Explain Putnam's reason for thinking that cats ain't necessarily
animals.





**A:** In a nutshell: The criteria of application of a term rests on
science.





Putnam, in "It Ain't Necessarily So," argues that the "analyticity" of
"cats are animals" depends upon the fact that the word "animal" is the
name of a semantic category and the word "cat" is a member of that
category. It might turn out that cats are in fact not animals at all,
but robots. Such a discovery would remove the word "cats" from the
semantic category of "animal." In other words, if all cats are
discovered to be something other than animals -- say, highly
sophisticated automata controlled by Martians - then we will no longer
say that cats are animals, even though we may continue to call the robot
cats "cats."





Moreover, Putnam distinguishes truths of the sort "all cats are
animals," which are true because they are based on a rather advanced
body of scientific knowledge, from truths of the sort "all bachelors are
unmarried," which are true by definition. The former, Putnam says, are
"less necessary" than the latter; they are contingent upon scientific
knowledge. Aspects of that scientific knowledge, such as that all cats
are animals, could turn out to be wrong. On the other hand, scientific
knowledge has no bearing on whether bachelors are thought to be
unmarried or not.







6.4 Putnam on Analyticity and Semantic Categories
-----------------------------------------------------



**Q:** Why does Putnam think that so-called analytic sentences (e.g.,
"Cats are animals") are not necessary truths.





**A:** Putnam, in "It Ain't Necessarily So," argues that the analyticity
of "cats are animals" depends upon the fact that the word "animal" is
the name of a semantic category and the word "cat" is a member of that
category. But it might turn out that cats are in fact not animals at
all, but robots. Such a discovery would remove the word "cats" from the
semantic category of "animal." In other words, if all cats are
discovered to be something other than animals -- say, highly
sophisticated automata controlled by Martians -- then we will no longer
say that cats are animals, even though we may continue to call the robot
cats "cats."





The placement of cats in the category of animals in turn rests upon a
rather advanced body of scientific knowledge, which makes such sentences
as "All cats are animals" seem like necessary truths. Scientific
knowledge is subject to change, however, and we may in fact discover,
for example, that cats are not really animals. That cats are animals is
contingent upon our body of scientific knowledge.





Moreover, Putnam distinguishes truths of the sort "all cats are
animals," which are true because they are based on scientific knowledge,
from truths of the sort "all bachelors are unmarried," which are true by
definition. The former, Putnam says, are "less necessary" than the
latter. Scientific knowledge has no bearing on whether all bachelors are
thought to be unmarried or not.







6.5 Putnam and Natural Kind Terms
-------------------------------------



**Q:** What is Putnam's twin earth argument? Is it related to his robot
cat argument? How? What does the twin earth argument show?





**A:** Putnam's Twin Earth argument shows that the extension of the term
"water" in the idiolect of my Doppelganger on Twin Earth is different
from the extension of the term "water" in the idiolect of me here and,
as such, that meanings are not in the head.





The argument goes like this: On Earth I can point to a particular
liquid, composed of H20, and call it "water." Meanwhile, my Doppelganger
on Twin Earth can point to a similar liquid -- one used in the same ways
on Twin Earth and having the same superficial properties as water on
Earth but composed of XYZ, not H20 -- and call it "water." Yet, by the
scientifically determined nature of water on Earth, the liquid on Twin
Earth, when a sample of it is brought back to Earth, will not be
"water." The extensions of the two words are different, and hence they
have different meanings. Otherwise, upon returning to Earth with the
water sample for Twin Earth, we would find ourselves in the paradoxical
situation of saying that, based on its superficial descriptive
properties, it is water while, because it is not H2O, it is not water.





Putnam's Twin Earth argument further shows that the sense of the term
"water" is not enough alone to fix the extension of the natural kind
term because the extension of the term is determined by a scientific
appeal to the natural world. Thus, extension, Putnam says, is not
determined by psychological state; the meaning of natural kind terms is
not in the head.





Besides its similar counterfactual form, Putnam's cat robot argument is
related to the twin earth argument by showing that what we believe to be
the extension of a term is tied to an advanced body of scientific
knowledge about the world. That we say "all cats are animals" is
contingent upon our knowledge about the world. If it turns out that all
cats are in fact robots, we will no longer say they are animals, though
we will continue, Putnam believes, to call them "cats." Thus, the
cat-robot example, like the twin earth water argument, shows that the
meaning of "cat" is not in the head.





Both arguments show that meanings of such natural kind terms as "water,"
"animal," and "cat" are not in the head and that the criteria of
application for such terms is based in an advanced body of scientific
knowledge. The criteria of applying the word "animals" to cats, for
instance, is contingent upon our knowledge that cats are animals and
not, say, robots controlled by Martians. Likewise, the criteria for
applying the word water to a substance that has all the superficial
phenomenal properties of water is that the substance's nature is in fact
H20 and not, say, XYZ.





That is, the (current) core criteria by which we call a liquid substance
"water" is that it is H20. The essential nature of water is that it is
H20, and knowledge of this essential nature rests of an advanced body of
scientific knowledge.





In "It Ain't Necessarily So," Putnam is broadly concerned with, among
other things, defending the traditional synthetic-analytic distinction
against Quine's attack of it. More specifically, though, Putnam is
interested in the criteria for a term's application. As such, he finds
himself asking "what would we say if ... ." Putnam attempts to use such
hypothetical questions to discern not only whether people apply a term
on the basis of a particular characteristic, but also whether or not
people would continue to apply the term to the set if it were to lack
the characteristic in question.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

7 Grice
===========



7.1 Grice on Meaning and Intention
--------------------------------------



**Q:** What does Grice think is the proper way to explain the locution
"A meant~nn~ something by x"?





**A:** For Grice, the proper way to explain that 'A meant~nn~ something
by x' is to say that "A intended the utterance of x to produce some
effect in an audience by means of the recognition of this intention." To
ask what A meant, Grice says, is to ask for a specification of the
intended effect.







7.2 Grice vs. Searle on Convention
--------------------------------------



**Q:** Can Grice reply to Searle's counterexample that the American
soldier's utterance "Kennst du das Land..." means "I am German"? If so,
why, and if not, why not?





**A:** Searle's counterexample of a American soldier trying to convince
his Italian captors that he is German officer by uttering "kannst du das
Land ... ?" is intended to demonstrate that Grice's account of meaning
does not show the connection between what a speaker means and what the
words he utters mean. Grice's account of meaning, Searle says, overlooks
the fact that what we mean with an utterance is also a matter of
convention. Searle thinks his counterexample satisfies *all* Grice's
conditions for meaning -- yet the utterance still fails to have meaning,
he says.





Grice can reply to Searle's counterexample in a straightforward way.
Grice can merely say that since the American officer does not really
know German, what he *is* saying by uttering in German "do you the know
the land where the lemon trees bloom?" does in fact mean "I am a German
officer" given the context, the speaker's intention, the recognition by
the hearer of that intention and the effect he hopes it will have. In
the situation of Searle's counterexample, the token of the type in
question does mean "I am a German officer."





One shortcoming of Grice's reply, however, is that it is limited to the
particular utterance in question, though Grice can respond with his own
example against Searle: "Welcome to my shop," says an Arab shopkeeper to
a Brit. The sentence, however, is a English token of an Arabic type that
means "you are a pig" or some such. In such a case, the meanings are the
same, Grice would say.





Major point: Both the examples demonstrate that Grice's account is one
of *tokens* of utterances or sentences.







7.3 Grice's Conception of Utternace Meaning
-----------------------------------------------



**Q:** What is Grice's conception of utterance meaning? How can Grice's
conception be defended against Searle's alleged counterexample?





**A:** Grice's conception of utterance meaning rests on the notion of
intention. To say that an utterance meant something is, for Grice, to
say that a person intended the utterance of X to produce some effect in
an audience by means of the recognition of the intention. Thus, to ask
what A meant, Grice says, is to ask for a specification of the intended
effect.





Searle's counterexample of a American soldier trying to convince his
Italian captors that he is German officer by uttering "kannst du das
Land, wo die Zitronen bluhen?" is intended to demonstrate that Grice's
account of meaning does not show the connection between what a speaker
means and what the words he utters mean. Grice's account of meaning,
Searle says, overlooks the fact that what we mean with an utterance is
also a matter of convention. Searle thinks his counterexample satisfies
all Grice's conditions for meaning -- yet the utterance still fails to
have meaning in the way Grice intended it to, Searle says.





Grice can reply to Searle's counterexample in a straightforward way.
Grice can merely say that since the American officer does not really
know German, what he is saying by uttering in German "do you the know
the land where the lemon trees bloom?" does in fact mean "I am a German
officer" given the context, the speaker's intention, the recognition by
the hearer of that intention and the effect he hopes it will have.
Grice's response appeals to the token-type distinction, with the token
of the sentence bearing the burden of meaning in this case. Grice could
accuse Searle of failing to perceive such a mention-use distinction.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

8 Austin
============



8.1 Austin on Performative Sentences
----------------------------------------



**Q:** Austin thinks that performative sentences do not have truth
conditions. Does Austin have a reason for thinking this? Does that
reason undermine Davidson's conception of the meaning of sentences?





**A:** Performative sentences do not have truth conditions, Austin says,
because they do not describe or report anything. Further, uttering a
performative sentence like "I promise to pay you back next week" is not
so much saying something as doing something. If nothing is said, it can
be neither true nor false. More: The truth values of performatives
cannot be analyzed without taking into account the speaker's intentions
and the hearer's understanding of the use of such a form.





In broad terms, Davidson's holistic conception of meaning seeks to
replace Frege's intensionalist position that manifests itself as "'p'
means 'q'" with an extensionalist approach based in the truth conditions
of sentences. More specifically, Davidson would define meaning by
replacing "p means q" with "S is true if and only if p," with 'S'
standing for sentence.





Davidson's definition of meaning works, he says, because it gives
necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of every sentence. To
give truth conditions, Davidson says, is a way of giving the meaning of
a sentence.





But if Austin's view that performative sentences have no truth value is
correct, then Davidson's definition of meaning cannot give the
conditions of truth, and hence the meaning, for performative sentences
-- because they have none.





Austin's view, if right, undermines Davidson's conception of the meaning
of sentences because, for it to work, all sentences must have truth
conditions to have meaning. If Austin is right, Davidson finds himself
having to explain meaning without appealing to truth conditions.







8.2 "I hereby wish you a happy new year."
---------------------------------------------



**Q:** "I hereby wish you a happy new year." Why does Austin think such
utterances are not true or false.





**A:** Austin thinks that such performative sentences as the one above
do not have truth values because they do not describe or report
anything. Further, uttering a performative sentence like "I hereby wish
you a happy new year" is not so much saying something as doing
something. If nothing is said, it can be neither true nor false. More:
The truth values of performatives cannot be analyzed without taking into
account the speaker's intentions and the hearer's understanding of the
use of such a form. These three interconnected reasons lead Austin to
think that performative utterances are neither true nor false.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

9 Davidson
==============



9.1 Davidson Contra Traditional Theorists on Belief Sentences
-----------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** What problem might Davidson have in mind when he says that
traditional theories of meaning cannot handle the semantics of belief
sentences? How might a traditional theoriest try to solve the problem?





**A:** The problem that Davidson has in mind is the one introduced by
Mates in "Synonymity" and explored by Church in "Intensional
Isomorphism," both of whom are broadly concerned with investigating
Carnap's notion of synonymy and, more generally, meaning. Consider: (1)
Whoever believes that D, believes that D. (a week) (2) Whoever believes
that D, believes that D'. (seven days)





The problem, as Mates points out, is that if anybody even doubts that
whoever believes that D believes that D', then a Carnapian explanation
of synonymity is wrong. The doubt indeed arises because, Davidson
believes, (1) and (2) may have different truth conditions.





The specific problem that Mates' remark elicits in Davidson's eyes is
that one cannot account for the meaning of sentences, let alone their
truth conditions, on the basis of the senses of the words in them.
Knowing the meaning of the words in a sentence does not, for Davidson,
add up to knowledge of what the sentence means. Specificially, Mates'
example demonstrates, Davidson believes, that knowledge of a sentence's
syntax combined with knowledge of its words does not alone yield
knowledge of what the sentence means. This in turn leads Davidson to
theorize that the only way to give the meaning of a sentence is to
provide a matching sentence that gives its meaning.





A traditional theorist might try to rescue the sentence's meaning by
putting forth a notion of sense instead of relying on the truth
conditions of the terms. The doubt beween 1 and 2 arises because the two
terms have a slightly different sense, even though they are
extensionally synonymous.





### 9.1.1 Comments



Compare Mates's problem, of which Davidson is thinking: The problem
emerges when senses are the same. Examples:
``` {.program}
(i) Whoever believes that B, believes that...fortnight.
(ii) Whoever believes that B, believes that...two weeks.
```





Davidson would say that in a case like this you have the same syntax and
the same sense yet the truth conditions are different.





The problem with Davidson's line of criticism is that it fails to grant
Frege's theory with the explanatory power that it has with respect to
other important cases, such as:
-   negative existential references
-   analyticity
-   identity statements
-   opaque contexts and substitution.









9.2 Davidson on Sentential Meaning
--------------------------------------



**Q:** Explain why Davidson thinks that a dictionary does not "touch the
standard problem, which is that we cannot account for even as much as
the truth conditions of \[belief\] sentences on the basis of what we
know of the meaning of the words in them."





**A:** One cannot account for the meaning of sentences, let alone their
truth conditions, on the basis of the senses of the words in them, even
when combined with knowledge of the sentence's syntax, Davidson argues.
Knowing the meaning of the words in a sentence does not, for Davidson,
add up to knowledge of what the sentence means.





The problem can be demonstrated by a paradigm introduced by Mates in
"Synonymity":



``` {.program}
(1) Whoever believes that D, believes that D.
(2) Whoever believes that D, believes that D'.
```



The problem, as Mates points out, is that if anybody even doubts that
whoever believes that D believes that D', then a traditionalist's
explanation of synonymity is wrong. The doubt indeed arises because,
Davidson believes, (1) and (2) may have different truth conditions even
though the only difference between the sentences lies in two synonomous
expressions. If the sentences have different truth conditions, despite
the synonymy of the only different expressions in them, then knowing the
meaning of the words, as provided for instance by a dictionary, cannot
account for the differences in truth conditons.







9.3 "Snow Is White" Is True If and Only If Grass Is Green
-------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** Davidson says, "The grotesqueness of (\`Snow is white' is true if
and only if grass is green) is in itself nothing against a theory of
which it is a consequence, provided the theory gives the correct results
for every sentence." Why does he think this? Is his reason a good one?
Explain.





**A:** Answer: First off, Davidson thinks that such an absurdity is not
party to his theory. Indeed, he believes that such a consequence is
nothing against it. For Davidson, that "Snow is white is true if and
only if grass is green" (S) is not part of the apparatus of his theory,
but a consequence of it. In other words, Davidson believes that the
grotesqueness, or absurdity, of (S) doesn't apply to the theory and, as
such, is not of valid criticism of it.





Davidson's reason for thinking this, however, is not a good one. First,
if Davidson's theory just matches truth conditions with meaning, he
fails to provide a sufficient answer to the objection because Davidson's
theory does not account for our intuitive notion of meaning. In other
words, it leaves something out of its explanation of our intuitive
notion of meaning precisely because it produces this absurd result. The
theory is too sparse; it does not properly specify meanings.





Second, Davidson's response is inadequeate because, even granting that
Davidson's theory by itself is not absurd and that such simple material
truths about the world as "grass is green" and "snow is white" have the
same truth value, the conjuction of the two is absurd. Thus the problem
seems to be with Davidson's theory even though Davidson says he's not
committed to such a consequence. We can, however, generate exactly the
same kind of absurdities using the formal truths of logic, and to that
Davidson cannot respond that he is not committed to the truths of formal
logic, because they are built into his theory.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

10 Quine
============



10.1 Quine's Argument Against Explaining Synonymy Using Substitution
------------------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** State Quine's argument against the possibility of explaining
synonymy on the basis of substitution procedures. Would there be any bad
consequences of accepting the form of argument that Quine uses here?
Explain.





**A:** First, Quine would argue that in general, there appears to be a
class of so-called analytic statements typified by "No bachelor is
married" (1). It can be turned into a logical truth (a statement that is
true and remains true under all reinterpretations of its components
other than logical particles) by putting synonyms for synonyms. Thus (1)
can be rendered as the logical truth "No unmarried man is married." Yet
such a procedure leans on the notion of synonymy, which, Quine says,
requires as much clarification as analyticity. After finding that
attempts to define synonymy rest on pre-existing synonymies, Quine turns
to interchangeability to explain it.





Interchangeability in all contexts without change in truth value,
however, will not explain synonymy because, discounting the drawback of
appealing to a prior notion of "word," it requires that we rely on the
notion of analyticity. That is, interchangeability *salve veritate*
assumes we have already made satisifactory sense of analyticity, making
the argument circular.





More specifically, we are forced to rely on necessary truths because
truth values cannot pick out synonymous pairs -- otherwise you fail to
account for coextensive terms. Thus you need necessary truths to get
around problems with coextension. But the appeal to necessary truths
begs the question because it requires analyticity. If you have to use
\`necessarily' you have analyticity already, Quine argues.







10.2 Quine Contra Carnap
----------------------------



**Q:** Quine makes two arguments against Carnapian meaning postulates
providing a basis for drawing the analytic-synthetic distinction.
Briefly state them. Is there a linguistic reason to think that one of
Quine's argument in this connection has to be right?





**A:** Besides the possibility that the semantical rules of meaning
postulates may themselves contain the word 'analytic' or that
analyticity may be attempted to be explained by the semantical rules
themselves, meaning postulates explain analyticity only relative to a
particular language. Analytic truths, however, are supposed to be
language independent.





Anyway, how would one know that languages are not being missed?
Languages might form an open set, in which case the examples would not
be complete and the definition would not capture the abstract property
of analyticity.





Another argument against Carnapian meaning postulates is that they
provide merely a list of examples of analytic sentences without actually
giving a definition of analyticity. Even if you suppose there is only
one language, the list would not define the heading "analytic"; it would
just give its extension. Carnap's meaning postulates theory, Quine
argues, is just a fancy version of using examples for definitions.
Meaning postulates are not about the sense of words but about their
referents. As such, meaning postulates are not about synonymy and
analyticity at all, but about the broader concepts of necessary truth
and necessary equivalence.







10.3 Quine's Indeterminancy Thesis
--------------------------------------



**Q:** State Quine's indeterminacy thesis. Explain (i) why he thinks
indeterminacy is different from the evidential underdetermination of
scientific theories and (ii) why he thinks that the study of translation
is "worse off" than physics.





**A:** Quine's indeterminacy thesis, founded on the finding that radical
translation reveals no language-independent propositions, holds that in
the study of intensional semantics there is no proper scientific subject
-- no facts against which to verify a theory. In radical translation,
the absence of indepedent controls in the matching of one seemingly
synonymous term for another causes indeterminancy. Thus, interderminancy
makes it misleading to say that an individual statement has empirical
content, and it further becomes folly to seek a boundary between
analytic and synthetic statements.





Indeterminancy is different from the evidential underdetermination of
scietific theories because with indeterminancy, there is no fixed
evidence from which to draw a sample in order to formulate a hypothesis,
while scientific theories suffer from only underdetermination because
there is a body of fixed evidence from which a sample can be drawn and a
hypothesis developed, even though the sample is incomplete. Thus, the
physicist is forced to project his theory toward elements outside the
sample.





The study of translation is worse off than physics because it suffers
from indetermination while physics suffers from underdetermination. In
physics, a theory can be verified against a body of fixed evidence; the
underdetermination is epistemic -- a limitation on knowledge.





In the study of translation, however, indeterminacy prevails: there is
no fact of the matter to be right or wrong about -- because there are no
language-neutral propositions. In other words, there is no body of
evidence against which a semantic theory could be verified. As such,
semantic theories are, Quine would say, theories about nothing.







10.4 Quine's Argument Against the Analytic-Synthetic Distinction
--------------------------------------------------------------------



**Q:** What is the structure of Quine's argument against the
analytic-synthetic distinction in "Two Dogmas of Empiricism"? Does the
argument play any role in his case for the indeterminancy of
translation?





**A:** The structure of Quine's argument in "Two Dogmas of Empiricism"
is a proof by cases. There are, Quine says, three places that we could
reasonably look to make objective sense of meaning: definition, logical
theory, and linguistics. Quine asks whether the methods for explaining
in any of the three areas can explain analyticity and synonymy.





The proof by cases dispels each one in turn. Definition falls short
because it either assumes prior synonymy relations or else has nothing
to do with meaning. In the area of logical theory, Carnap's meaning
postulates and semantic rules are shown to be of no help in revealing
the nature of analyticity and synonymy; with their extensionalist
nature, they pertain more to necessary truths and necessary equivalence
than analyticity. In linguistics, Quine demonstrates that the methods
for defining concepts are unable to define synonymy and analyticity
without being circular. Thus, Quine concludes, there are no methods by
which one can clarify snynonymy and analyticity and hence there are no
linguistically neutral meanings.





The argument from "Two Dogmas" supplies the "missing" argument in
the case for the inderminancy of translation. The argument plays a role
in the indeterminacy thesis because Quine's reason for thinking that
independent controls do not exist in translation takes its force from
the argument that there are no linguistically neutral meanings. The
absence of linguistically neutral meanings is a prerequiste for the
indeterminacy of translation.

















------------------------------------------------------------------------

11 Related
==============



<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Interpretation and
Indeterminancy](http://www.criticism.com/da/da_indet.html)** <img src="/images/0631166238.gif" align="right" /> Throughout the essay, I will argue a hard line: the exact meaning of a
speaker's utterance in a contextualized exchange is often indeterminate.
Within the context of the analysis of the teacher-pupil exchange, I will
argue for the superiority of interactional linguistics over speech act
theory because it reduces the indeterminacy and yields a more principled
interpretation, especially when the interactional approach is
complemented by elements from other sociologically influenced methods,
namely the ethnography of communication and Labovian sociolinguistics. [Read more ...](http://www.criticism.com/da/da_indet.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Hermogenes Was Right, Socrates
Wrong](http://www.criticism.com/lingustics/cratylus.html)** In Harris and Taylor's chapter on Plato's "Cratylus" in Landmarks in
Linguistic Thought, Cratylus takes the position that the form and
meaning of a word are inextricably related. For Cratylus, "everything,"
including Hermogenes, "has a right name of its own, which comes by
nature" even though some people, like Hermogenes, are named incorrectly
(Cratylus 383, as quoted in Harris and Taylor, p. 1). [Read more ...](http://www.criticism.com/linguistics/cratylus.html)


