---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    Why the truth-conditional approach to semantics makes it difficult to
    free semantics from pragmatic considerations.
keywords: |
    Linguistics, semantics, pragmatics, Ralph Fasold, meaning, intension,
    truth conditions, Austin, philosophy of language
title: Difficulties in Freeing Semantics from Pragmatics
---



### The Truth-Conditional Approach Goes Awry 



<i class="fa fa-question-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> **Question:** Why does the truth-conditional approach to semantics make
it difficult to free semantics from pragmatic considerations?





**A**s Fasold (1990) points out, truth-conditional semantics cannot be
freed from pragmatic considerations because establishing the truth of a
proposition often crucially depends on identifying the referents
involved. In some cases, like "grass is green," the identification of
the referents is straightforward, and the truth-conditional approach can
handle it easily. But in others cases, it's not so straightforward: "He
is the Prime Minister of France." To whom does the deictic reference
"he" refer? When was it uttered? It is only through the introduction of
context, and therefore pragmatics, that the truth conditions of such a
proposition can be evaluated.





Indeed, the truth conditions of expressions using such indexical items
as personal pronouns, demonstratives, tenses, and time adverbs typically
cannot be determined without an indication of their context. The same
can often be said of sentences containing anaphoric reference. Some
deictic references, too, cannot be explicated by truth conditions alone.
The interpretation of indexical expressions typically requires an
estimate of the speaker's beliefs and intentions, often at the time and
place of the utterance.





Tautologies and contradictions also make it difficult to free
truth-conditional semantics from pragmatics. The phrase "war is war"
seems absurd analyzed within the domain of truth-conditional semantics.
Yet, given a smidgeon of context, it can quickly become meaningful, even
insightful. The same is true of some apparent contradictions, like "Kyle
couldn't do it even if he could." The proposition is simultaneously
false in one sense and true in another. Issues of deixis aside, a
truth-conditional semantics cannot account in any significant way for
the meaning of such sentences without appealing to context or shared
assumption. In fact, such sentences are often meaningful only in
context, and thus a semantic approach that deals with sentence meaning
outside context obviously cannot handle them.





All presuppositions seem to be closely related to context because they
depend on what people know or believe about the world, making it
difficult to account for them in a context-free system of
truth-conditional semantics.





**I**t seems wise to take Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet caveat to heart:
"Since direct experience with interpretation of language is experience
with interpreting uses, however, we cannot always be sure in advance
which phenomena will fall exclusively in the domain of semantics and
which will turn out to require attention to pragmatic factors as well"
(Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet, 1990:5). A truth-conditional approach to
semantics that proceeds without taking account of pragmatic
considerations dooms itself to being an inadequate theory of meaning.
More: A truth-conditional approach to meaning that does not rely heavily
on pragmatics would, it seems, leave unexplained the meaning of most
sentences, a problem foreseen by Austin.





By the end of *How to Do Things with Words*, Austin has expanded his
argument beyond explicit performatives to include all kinds of
utterances, including statements, for "stating," he says, "is performing
an act" (p. 139). Austin sums up his argument with the following
conclusion: "The truth or falsity of a statement depends not merely on
the meanings of words but on what act you were performing in what
circumstances" (p. 145). The truth conditions of explicit and implicit
performatives cannot be analyzed without taking into account the
speaker's intentions and the hearer's understanding of the use of such a
form. The strong claim of Austin's theory of speech acts is that all
sentences are essentially acts -- performatives -- leaving them
unexplainable by truth conditions alone. Such a view, if correct, makes
it difficult to free semantics from pragmatic considerations; otherwise,
the truth-conditional account would apply to only a very limited set of
sentences, leaving the meaning of most unexplained.






### <i class="fa fa-cogs"></i> Related Pages 



<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Philosophy of Language Questions and
Answers](philosophy-of-language-answers.html)**. The argument from "Two Dogmas" supplies the "missing" argument in
the case for the inderminancy of translation. The argument plays a role
in the indeterminacy thesis because Quine's reason for thinking that
independent controls do not exist in translation takes its force from
the argument that there are no linguistically neutral meanings. The
absence of linguistically neutral meanings is a prerequiste for the
indeterminacy of translation. [Read more ...](philosophy-of-language-answers.html)





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Austin on Utterances](speech-acts.html)**





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Schonfinkeled Characteristic
Functions](schonfinkeled-functions.html)**





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Distinguishing Pragmatics from
Semantics](semantics-vs-pragmatics.html)**




