---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    This page explains the role of the sociolinguistic variable in Labovian
    methodology.
keywords: |
    sociolinguistics, sociolinguistic variable, labov, labovian methodology,
    quantitative sociolinguistics, pragmatics, linguistics
title: The Sociolinguistic Variable
---

### Labovian Methodology


**T**he *sociolinguistic variable* is, Fasold (1990) says, a set of
alternative ways of saying the same thing, although the alternatives, or
variants, have social significance. More specifically, a sociolinguistic
variable is a linguistic element that co-varies not only with other
linguistic elements, but also with a number of extralinguistic
independent variables like social class, age, sex, ethnic group or
contextual style. Labovian methodology seeks to isolate variables at the
levels of core features and to derive rules for their distribution,
making correlations with social variables.





The concept of the sociolinguistic variable is theoretically significant
because it allows quantitative statements to be made about language use.
For instance, one speaker might be said to use more or less of a
particular variant than another speaker, rather than categorically to
use it or not.





Studies using the concept of the sociolinguistic variable reveal
probabalistic, not categorical, occurences. Nevertheless,
"sociolinguistic variables," Gumperz (1992: vii) writes, "are themselves
constitutive of social reality and can be treated as part of a more
general class of indexical signs which guide and channel the
interpretation of intent."





### An Example from New York City



An example of a sociolinguistic variable is (r) in New York City. The
distribution of the variable may be studied in terms of whether a
speaker pronounces or deletes the consonant /r/ in final or post-vocalic
preconsonantal positions (for example in car, cart). Speaker A's use of
the variable can be compared with speaker B's, since (r) is a piece of
the language which can be counted. The variants of a given variable are
identified in advance and assigned a numerical value which reflects the
social values atttached to them. Their incidence is correlated
statistically with (i) relevant features of the sentence or discourse
environment and (ii) with social characteristics, such as class, of
their speakers. That is, the value assignment permits a given individual
to be assigned a position on a status scale. The status indexes are then
grouped into (for instance) classes.





In Labovian sociolinguistics, there are different kinds of variables.
(r) is an example of a discrete variable, the score being calculated in
terms of either its presence or absence. More difficult are continuous
variables, usually vowels, which cannot be scored in the same way as
discrete variables. They are instead given a value in accordance with
the position they occupy in phonetic space, to which a social meaning
may also be assigned.





In examining data using the sociolinguistic variable, Labov recognizes
the methodological importance of the principle of accountability:
Analysts should record all occurences of a variable rather than
selecting those variants of a variable that tend to confirm their
argument while ignoring others that do not.







### Variation Tied to Class Stratification



Studies using the concept of the sociolinguistic variable have revealed
class stratification: Certain variants may be used, for instance, most
frequently by the highest-status class, least frequently by the
lowest-status class, and at intermediate frequencies by the classes in
between, with frequency matching their relative status. Variants are
not, however, associated exclusively with a particular class; it is
their relative frequencies that are stratified by class.





During a study in New York City, Labov identified five sociolinguistic
variables, one of which he labeled (dh) to distinguish it from (th), and
recognized three variants of it: \[\_\], \[d\], and \[dd\]. Labov's
research resulted in a pattern of class stratification for all five of
the sociolinguistic variables studied, and the research has been
replicated many times since.






### <i class="fa fa-cogs"></i> Related Pages



<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Pragmatic Accounts of
Communication](pragmatics-answers.xml)**





<i class="fa fa-file-text"></i> **[Interpretation and
Indeterminancy](/da/da_indet.html)** <img src="/images/0631166238.gif" align="right" /> Throughout the essay, I will argue a hard line: the exact meaning of a
speaker's utterance in a contextualized exchange is often indeterminate.
Within the context of the analysis of the teacher-pupil exchange, I will
argue for the superiority of interactional linguistics over speech act
theory because it reduces the indeterminacy and yields a more principled
interpretation, especially when the interactional approach is
complemented by elements from other sociologically influenced methods,
namely the ethnography of communication and Labovian sociolinguistics. [Read more ...](/da/da_indet.html)


