---
description: |
	Interpretation and Indeterminancy in Discourse Analysis, an essay in linguistics by Steve Hoenisch. Criticism.Com contains other essays in discourse analysis and linguistics as well as in social science, philosophy, Wittgenstein, Weber, Bakhtin, Freud, Barthes, Dostoyevsky, and psychoanalysis.
keywords: |
	discourse analysis, linguistics, books, Schiffrin, Bakhtin, sociology, semiology, structuralism, postmodernism, Saussure, poststructuralism, sociolinguistics, Steve Hoenisch, Roland Barthes, Wittgenstein, meaning, semantics, philosophy, bookstore, social science, text linguistics, Gumperz
title: |
	Interpretation and Indeterminacy in Discourse Analysis
---






By Steve Hoenisch \
Copyright 1996-2020 Steve Hoenisch | [www.Criticism.Com](https://www.criticism.com/) \
<i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [Download Essay in PDF](https://www.criticism.com/da/da_indet.pdf) \




1 Introduction
==============

This essay has several objectives. The first section seeks to address a
few of the theoretical issues that underlie the general framework of
discourse analysis as presented in Deborah Schiffrin's book *[Approaches
to
Discourse*
and how those issues relate to
interactional<img src="/images/bkgumper.gif" align="right" /> 
sociolinguistics and speech act theory. I will discuss what I believe to
be the most prominent issues, explaining why they are problematic for
developing analyses of discourse. In the second section, I will briefly
apply two approaches to discourse -- speech act theory and Gumperz's
version of interactional sociolinguistics -- to a short conversational
exchange between a teacher and a pupil in order to compare, quite
generally, the utility of each approach and to provide support for the
theoretical positions I laid out in the first section.

<img src="/images/0631166238.gif" align="right" />
Throughout the essay, I will argue a hard line: the exact meaning of a
speaker's utterance in a contextualized exchange is often indeterminate.
Within the context of the analysis of the teacher-pupil exchange, I will
argue for the superiority of interactional linguistics over speech act
theory because it reduces the indeterminacy and yields a more principled
interpretation, especially when the interactional approach is
complemented by elements from other sociologically influenced methods,
namely the ethnography of communication and Labovian sociolinguistics.





2 Methodological Challenges
===========================

Given the six approaches to discourse that Schiffrin presents, the first
question is how to choose one of them for use in an analysis. Each
approach, no doubt, has its strengths and weaknesses. But the question
of how to select an approach goes beyond strengths and weaknesses. In
the analysis of the same data, each of the six approaches may yield
different results. In fact, the application of any one approach by
different researchers to the same data may produce divergent
conclusions. Perhaps the best method would be to synthesize them all
into a single, formalized approach that reduces the constructs supplied
by each of them to nonredundant components which can be applied to data
as needed.

Until such a synthesis is attempted, though, I will maintain that the
choice of approach should be determined by two criteria: the
researcher's questions or objectives and the approach that is gauged to
produce the greatest explanatory yield in relation to those questions or
objectives. Both criteria may necessitate that several approaches are
used in a given study.

Furthermore, the analysis should provide not only a description of the
data but also a principled explanation of it. Depending on the data,
then, a complete description, let alone an explanation, may again
require the application of more than one approach. Indeed, given a
corpus of data and a sharply formulated set of questions and objectives,
the most insightful results may stem from the use of several approaches
to discourse.

At any rate, before an analysis of discourse can begin, the purpose of
the inquiry must be clearly formulated and narrowly specified: Questions
must be defined, objectives laid out. In this regard, several problems
occasionally arise in the approaches and their applications, at least as
presented by Schiffrin: What does the particular analysis seek to
explain? What phenomena does it attempt to account for? What questions
of human behavior and language use does it seek to address? And perhaps
a more important but often neglected question: What phenomena are left
unaccounted for?

2.1 Points of Departure
-----------------------

Some approaches proceed in their analyses from sharper starting points
than others. The objectives of interactional sociolinguistics, for
example, seem more clearly defined than those of speech act theory.
Broadly construed, interactional sociolinguistics views "language as
indexical to a social world."1 By analyzing discourse, interactional
sociolinguistics aims to reveal the social meaning of conduct in a
particular context and of the interaction between self and other
associated with the conduct. On the other hand, speech act theory,
though not initially formulated as an approach to discourse, concerns
itself "with what people do with language."2 Such a starting point may
be overly broad to be of insightful use in discourse analysis.
Schiffrin, for instance, points out that such all-inclusive functional
approaches threaten "to submerge discourse analysis within the broader
and more general analyses of language functions, without leaving a space
within which discourse analysts can formulate a clear set of principles,
goals, topics, and methods specific to their own enterprise."3 Although
Schiffrin does not explicitly place speech act theory in such a category
during her discussion of the definition of discourse analysis in Chapter
2, she implicitly does so because speech act theory is, in effect, an
approach that takes language use as its central domain. Thus, the focus
of speech act theory may address only the surface characteristics of the
language used in a sentence within a wider discourse, providing little
more than a sophisticated taxonomy of the obvious. As such, a speech act
theory analysis may provide only superficial descriptions of the
functions of words or sentences in a discourse while lacking the
machinery to connect those functions with not only with the rest of the
discourse but also with the sociological and cultural influences that
surface in language and often decisively affect meaning. Interactional
sociolinguistics may be better positioned than speech act theory to
reveal these cultural influences and their effect upon meaning.

2.2 Methodological Determinism
------------------------------

As I mentioned above, questions must be narrowly formulated, objectives
clearly laid out. Taken together, questions and objectives help govern
the choice of approach. On closer inspection, however, a problem soon
emerges from such a point of departure. It leads to a theoretical
morass, a circle of determination from which it is impossible to escape
with objectivity intact: the research agenda determines the approach;
the approach singles out certain phenomena over others; the analysis of
the singled-out phenomena that the approach generates answers the
questions or meets the objectives specified at the outset. The circle is
now complete: The questions we ask produce the answers we seek. The
findings are radically determined by the perspective.

There are a few ways out of this predicament. The simplest is to
acknowledge that a certain amount of subjectivity, of methodological
determinism, is inherent in whatever choice of approach is made. First
heeded by the sociologist Max Weber, this position maintains that the
researcher's objectives and subsequent analysis are necessarily
influenced by his or her values, which, Weber believed, could not be
justified "scientifically," that is, through value-free analysis.

Thus, in comparing different approaches to discourse, one system cannot
be chosen over another without taking a value or end -- such as reducing
miscommunication between teachers and
pupils<img src="/images/bk_by_da.gif" align="right" />
-- into consideration. (Even though Schiffrin analyzes the same text and
reaches somewhat different conclusions using different approaches, the
subjectivity inherent with approaches to discourse does not seem to be
made explicit in Approaches to Discourse, but is made early on in Brown
and Yule's *[Discourse
Analysis*:
"The perception and interpretation of each text is essentially
subjective."4)

A second, more rigorous retreat from the circle of methodological
determinism would be to maintain that the results of an approach's
analysis must be (more or less) reproducible by at least one but
preferable two other approaches. Such reproduction could be taken as
partial but not absolute verification.

A third possibility would be to apply several approaches to the
discourse in question and closely compare the results, drawing
conclusions only after divergent or competing explanations are resolved.

In any event, all three retreats necessitate that conclusions are seen
as explanations, not truths. A complete comparison of the three
possibilities and their methodological consequences lies beyond the
scope of this essay.





3 The Pupil-Teacher Exchange
============================

<img src="/images/0881335169.gif" align="right" /> To
identify some strengths and weaknesses of each theory as well as to
gather some evidence for my theoretical arguments, I will briefly apply
speech act theory and interactional sociolinguistics to the exchange
below, which will be considered from the broad viewpoint of what
Schiffrin calls semantic and pragmatic goals: "how does the organization
of discourse, and the meaning and use of particular expressions and
constructions within certain contexts, allow people to convey and
interpret the communicative content of what is said?"5

> (1) TEACHER: James, what does this word say?

> (2) JAMES: I don't know. (with final rising intonation)

> (3) TEACHER: Well, if you don't want to try someone else will. Freddy?

> (4) FREDDY: Is that a "p" or a "b"?

> (5) TEACHER: (encouragingly) It's a "p."

> (6) FREDDY: Pen. 6

<img src="/images/0452275652.gif" align="right" />
Before proceeding, I would like to made a few assumptions about the
exchange. First, I will assume that the teacher has been teaching these
15 children for long enough to be at least a little familiar with their
routine habits, behaviors, and tendencies. Second, I assume that the
teacher is speaking and acting in accord with either cultural
conventions or her familiarity with the students' behavioral patterns. I
further assume that she is in no way acting maliciously, spitefully or
preferentially (admittedly a generous assumption but one I will make
nonetheless). Also, Schiffrin notes that in James's African American
community, a rising intonation conveys a desire for encouragement. I
will assume that Freddy is white and that the teacher is also white.
Schiffrin uses feminine pronouns to refer to the teacher, and I will
take these references as grounds for assuming the teacher is female.

In comparing speech act theory and interactional sociolinguistics, I am
particularly interested in how they handle (2) and (3) in the discourse
above. The central questions are as follows:

(i) What does James mean when he utters "I don't know" in (2).

(ii) Why does the teacher respond the way she does in (3).

An additional question that I will not address in any depth but that
could shed light on the analysis is, Why does the teacher encourage
Freddy so nicely but respond to James with apparent animosity. An
analysis using interactional sociolinguistics' notions of face and
self-other alignment could be particularly insightful in addressing this
question.

3.1 Speech Act Theory
---------------------

<img src="/images/bkaustin.gif" align="right" />
Speech act theory, Schiffrin writes, "focuses upon knowledge of
underlying conditions for production and interpretation of acts through
words."7 From this characterization, I expect the approach to be
particularly helpful in discovering the underlying conditions of the
production of (2) and its interpretation as borne out by the response in
(3).

At the core of speech act theory are explicit and implicit
performatives, sentences that "are not used just to say things, i.e.
describe states of affairs, but rather actively to do things."8 To
succeed, performatives must meet certain felicity
conditions,<img src="/images/bkslprag.gif" align="right" />
outlined by Stephen Levinson in
[*Pragmatics*:

> A. (i) There must be a conventional procedure having a conventional
> effect

> (ii) The circumstances and persons must be appropriate, as specified
> in the procedure

> B. The procedure must be executed (i) correctly and (ii) completely

> C. Often, (i) the persons must have the requisite thoughts, feelings
> and intentions, as specified in the procedure, and (ii) if consequent
> conduct is specified, then the relevant parties must so do.9

What is James doing in (2)? What does (2) count as in the context given
by the exchange? At face value, (2) could be taken merely as a literal
report about James's internal state: He does not know. The problem with
this interpretation, however, is that it does not correspond well with
the teacher's response: There is a gap between the literal meaning of
(2) and the effect it brings about in its hearer. The teacher apparently
takes James's (2) as meaning that James does not feel like trying. At
least from the teacher's perspective, which is assumed to be informed by
James's previous behavioral patterns, James, in uttering (2), is doing
something more than merely reporting his inner state; he is avoiding the
question. James is uttering what John Austin would call an implicit
performative. The teacher gives little weight to the rising intonation
of James's response, an intonation pattern that opens the possibility of
a third analysis of James's speech act.

The rising intonation of James's utterance, as Schiffrin points out in
her chapter on interactional sociolinguistics, can be interpreted as
indicating a need for encouragement. Seen in this way, the utterance
meets
<img src="/images/0521357187.gif" align="right" />
most of Austin's felicity conditions. Briefly, James's utterance is a
conventional procedure, at least within his African American community,
and is supposed to have a conventional effect, the elicitation of
encouragement. The procedure seems to be executed completely and
correctly. The circumstances seem appropriate enough, but the persons as
specified in the procedure may not be: The teacher, who is white, does
not belong to James's African-American community. Thus, James can be
seen as performing the act of requesting encouragement by uttering (2)
but it misfires because it is directed to an inappropriate person.
James's speech act is a conventional procedure only within his
community.

To summarize, under the theory of speech acts at least three possible
explanations, given the data above, can be drawn:

(i) James is giving a straightforward report of his inner state, which
is misinterpreted by the teacher.

(ii) James is trying to avoid the question, and is rightly interpreted
by the teacher as trying to do so.

(iii) James is asking for encouragement but the act misfires because it
violates the felicity condition stipulating that the persons involved
fit the procedure.

We have arrived at the heart of the problem with speech act theory.
There are three alternative explanations, all equally plausible. Two of
the explanations involve speech acts. The other views the utterance as
merely a literal report. The explanatory power of speech act theory
stops here. It provides no useful criteria for determining whether
James's utterance in fact a speech act or merely a report. If we concede
that speech act theory "ends up as a general theory that pertains to all
kinds of utterances,"10 not just explicit and implicit performatives,
then we can at least say that all three of the utterances are speech
acts. But this gets us nowhere: We are left with three alternative acts
and no criteria, perhaps save felicity condition C above, for
determining which procedure is actually being undertaken by James. We
cannot further establish how to categorize James's utterance in the
taxonomy of speech acts. Condition C -- "often, (i) the persons must
have the requisite thoughts, feelings and intentions, as specified in
the procedure" -- is of no help, not only because we don't even know the
procedure he is undertaking but also because we cannot know what he is
thinking, feeling or intending.

In summary, speech act theory provides only possible descriptions of the
meaning of the pupil-teacher exchange with no criteria other than C,
which is empirically unacceptable, for choosing among the alternative
interpretations. Beyond trying to determine James's thoughts, feelings,
and intentions by interviewing him or experimenting on him, which may be
empirically impractical or unreliable (James may be unavailable for
comment, may be unwilling to cooperate, may give a false impression of
his thoughts, may be misled by the questions, etc.), we cannot even
begin to choose among the three alternatives of what he may mean or
intend by uttering "I don't know" in the classroom context of our
teacher-pupil example. Applying speech act theory to the pupil-teacher
example shows that what x counts as in context y is often indeterminable
because the "requisite thoughts, feelings and intentions" of the speaker
are frequently neither known nor ascertainable. The connection to
conventions that speech act theory establishes in felicity condition A
begins to shed some light on the matter but fails to provide the
necessary connection to culture that could help determine whether
James's rising intonation indicates a need for encouragement or is
merely a noncontrastive element of the utterance.

<img src="/images/bk_by_da.gif" align="right" /> The
conjecture that a strong connection to culture could advance the
interpretation of James's remarks is supported by the would-be failure
of applying a Gricean pragmatic analysis to his utterance. Indeed, such
an analysis, when based upon conversational implicature, would likewise
get us nowhere, though an analysis based on conventional implicature
begins to point in the right direction, just as the use of felicity
condition A did in the speech act theory analysis. Yet the same
interpretations remain equally probable, and Gricean pragmatics would
provide little basis for choosing one interpretation over another in a
principled way.

Speech act theory does have a certain utility, however. The approach
reveals disjunction between two of the three possible interpretations of
James's utterance and the teacher's response. But the theory stops short
of providing a principled method by which to identify the nature of the
utterance and to pinpoint the reason for the disjunction where it
arises.

3.2 Interactional Sociolinguistics
----------------------------------

Interactional sociolinguistics, Schiffrin says, takes from John Gumperz
a focus "on how people from different cultures may share grammatical
knowledge of a language, but differently contextualize what is said such
that very different messages are produced."11 As such, Gumperz aims "to
develop interpretative sociolinguistic approaches to the analysis of
real time processes in face to face encounters."12 The constructs that
Gumperz's interactional sociolinguistics uses to analyze discourse
include contextualization cues, which are signaling mechanisms "of
language and behavior (verbal and nonverbal signs) that relate what is
said to the contextual knowledge ... that contributes to the
presuppositions necessary to accurate inferencing of what is meant."13
The definition of contextualization cues, Schiffrin points out, contains
the notion of contextual presupposition, the assumed knowledge that
permits the inferencing of two related levels of meaning: the kind of
communicative activity being undertaken in the utterance and the
conventional communicative force that the speaker intends by making the
utterance.

Schiffrin's chapter on interactional sociolinguistics uses the
teacher-pupil exchange to demonstrate how Gumperz's contextualization
cues can affect the interpretation of a message. The teacher's response,
Schiffrin says, indicates that the teacher is interpreting James's "I
don't know" not only according to its literal meaning but also as
suggesting that James does not want to try to answer the question. Yet
in James's African-American community, rising intonation conveys the
desire for encouragement. Thus, the teacher, in Gumperz's view, "did not
retrieve the contextualization presuppositions needed to accurately
interpret Freddy's message from his use of rising intonation."14 In this
way, contextualization cues can affect the message's meaning. "The
methodological consequence of this," Schiffrin writes, "is that one can
discover shared meaning by ... using the reaction that an utterance
evokes as evidence of whether interpretive conventions were shared."

In the pupil-teacher exchange, there may be a dislignment between the
pupil's remark and the teacher's reply, as the speech act theory
analysis showed, depending on what James actually means. Interactional
sociolinguistics also exposes this disjunction: The meaning of James's
utterance, except if viewed as avoidance, does not seem to be shared by
both the teacher and him.

At least in light of the data given, however, interactional
sociolinguistics also falls short of giving the meaning of James's
remark, though the approach does provide a principled method by which,
with further study of the reactions that James's "I don't knows" receive
in his usual cultural setting, conclusions could be drawn about the
likelihood of what James meant.

The empirical methods are these: We could follow James around in his
community for several days, pay particular attention to the intonation
of such utterances as "I don't know," and gauge whether the utterances,
when made with rising intonation, elicit a response of encouragement. If
such a response predominates, we can assert that in his conversation
with the teacher, James was in all likelihood seeking encouragement. Yet
this investigation still does not show us what James was thinking at the
time; the meaning of that particular utterance remains, in the end,
indeterminable, save another method of analysis that can tell us with
some degree of certainty what he was thinking at the time.

Such an empirical line of investigation begins to lead away from
interactional sociolinguistics and into the ethnography of
communication, which quite generally puts forth "a methodology by which
to discover \`what counts' as communicative events" using the
distinction between emic and etic.15 In other words, by following James
around in his community, we could determine whether, in his culture,
rising intonation in such responses as "I don't know" is "emic," or
classifiable as contrastive for meaning. The approach would also use the
methodology of Labovian sociolinguistics, whereby a statistical
probability would be established for whether James sought to avoid the
question or receive encouragement with his reply to the teacher's
question. Thus we have arrived at a more principled theoretical approach
and a tenable empirical method for interpreting James's remark.





4 Conclusion
============

My objective in analyzing the exchange between James and his teacher has
been simply to try to determine the meaning of James's utterance in the
given context under realistic assumptions about the speaker and the
hearer. The determination has proven elusive in light of the data given
and without resort to additional empirical investigation. Even with
additional study, the actual semantic import of James's remark would
remain ultimately indeterminable: We cannot know what he was thinking,
feeling, or intending when he uttered that particular statement, even if
it turns out that in all other cases of uttering "I don't know" with
rising intonation James was, in fact, seeking encouragement. The
teacher, in interpreting James's remark, is in a similar position as the
discourse analyst: She cannot know, with any degree of certainty, what
James is thinking and what he intends by his remark.

The untenable nature of speech act theory's felicity condition C renders
that theory's descriptive power unproductive, allowing no feasible way
to calculate the meaning of an utterance even after it is reduced to a
speech act. On the other hand, Interactional sociolinguistics,
especially when complemented by elements from other approaches to
discourse, begins to provide a principled method by which an utterance's
meaning can be analyzed and interpreted.

Ultimately, then, the indeterminacy of an utterance's meaning, even
within a contextualized stream of discourse, makes an essential point
for the practice of discourse analysis: the identification of meaning in
a given context, even when much is known about the participants, remains
an interpretation, and perhaps a methodologically driven one at that. In
light of the interpretive nature of discourse analysis and that meaning
is often indeterminate, it becomes important for an approach to provide,
to the extent possible, an empirically verifiable method of analysis
that does not appeal to the internal intentions, thoughts, or feelings
of the speaker.





5 Notes
=======

1. Deborah Schiffrin, *Approaches to Discourse* (Cambridge, Mass.:
Blackwell, 1994), p. 105.

2. Ibid. p. 90.

3. Ibid. p. 39.

4. Gillian Brown and George Yule, *Discourse Analysis* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 11.

5. Ibid. p. 41.

6. From Schiffrin, p. 100, who takes it from J. Gumperz's
<img src="/images/0521288967.gif" align="right" /> [Discourse
Strategies
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 147.

7. Schiffrin, Approaches to Discourse, p. 6.

8. Stephen C. Levinson,
*[Pragmatics*
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 228. Emphasis in
original.

9. Ibid. p. 229.

10. Ibid. p. 231.

11. Schiffrin, *Approaches to Discourse*, p. 7.

12. Schiffrin quoting Gumperz, p. 98.

13. Schiffrin, *Approaches to Discourse*, p. 100.

14. Ibid. p. 100.

15. Ibid. p. 141.





6 Related Pages
===============


<i class="fa fa-file-text-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [A Wittgensteinian Approach to Discourse
Analysis](lw_da.html). This essay seeks to take Wittgenstein's influence on discourse analysis
a step further by using his writings as the theoretical foundation for
an approach to analyzing discourse that is distinct from speech act
theory,
<img src="/images/bkgenres.gif" align="right" />
<img src="/images/0816612285.gif" align="right" />
which stems from the analytic tradition in philosophy, and to suggest
that a Wittgenstein-inspired approach may actually be closer in spirit
and content to that of an unlikely candidate whose views, in contrast to
the analytic school, harbor a distinctly Continental flavor which has
come to influence critical theory: Mikhail Bakhtin. [Read more ...](lw_da.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [Indoctrination and Resistance in
Psychotherapeutic Dialogue](indoctrination.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [The Construction of the Double as Social
Object](eth_dost.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [Ethnomethodology: Core Principles,
Concepts, Views](ethnomethodology.html). Ethnomethodology is "the study of common social knowledge, in particular
as it concerns the understanding of others and the varieties of
circumstance in which it can take place." -- Simon Blackburn,
<img src="/images/0192831348.gif" align="right" /> [The
Oxford Dictionary of
Philosophy,
p. 126. [Read more ...](ethnomethodology.html)

<i class="fa fa-file-text-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> [Grice's Cooperation Principle and
Conversational Maxims](grice-maxims.html)

