---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    This essay how Emile Durkheim thought educational systems reflect
    underlying changes in society.
keywords: |
    Durkheim, Emile Durkheim, philosophy, education, educational systems,
    education policy, public policy, modernization, industrialism, religion,
    teachers, Steve Hoenisch
title: Durkheim and Educational Systems
---



1 Introduction
==================



**I**n Emile Durkheim's view, educational systems reflect underlying
changes in society because the systems are a construct built by society,
which naturally seeks to reproduce its collectively held values,
beliefs, norms, and conditions through its institutions. Thus, as time
unfolds, educational systems come to contain the imprint of past stages
in the development of society, as each epoch leaves its imprint on the
system. By uncovering these imprints and analyzing them, the development
of a society can be reconstructed from the educational system.





The reflection of such changes, however, would not be possible if
educational systems were not mirrors of society, albeit on a miniature
scale. Changes in society manifest themselves in the educational system
because it is constructed by society's members to, in Durkheim's words,
"express their needs." In short, society constructs its educational
system to promote and reproduce its ideal of what a human should be,
especially of what a human being should be as a part of society. In this
way, the educational system also becomes a "constraint," a term that
Durkheim uses in the sense of "cultural determination and the influence
of socialization."1 For Durkheim, education becomes a constraint, Steven
Lukes explains, "when certain socially given ideas and values are
internalized by individuals who thereby acquire certain beliefs, wants
and feelings and act in certain ways."2 Lukes quotes Durkheim as saying
that education is thus "\`a continuous effort to impose on the child
ways of seeing, feeling and acting at which he would not have arrived
spontaneously.'"3















------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Common Beliefs
====================



The ideal of what the child should become, for Durkheim, arises from the
common beliefs of society's members, even though individuals or groups
of them may have different beliefs. To an extent, Durkheim says, there
is a set of underlying beliefs common enough among all stratum of
society to allow their manifestation, though sometimes the manifestation
takes a slightly altered form to suit the nature of the institutions.





Because the system of education arises from the common beliefs of
society's members, it is a product of collective, not individual,
thought. Thus, a system of education, being a product of the
collectivity, necessarily embodies those values that are expressed by
the conscious collective. As a society's collective values change, the
educational system reflects these changes. Durkheim points out this
tendency as he comments on the relationship between education, religion,
and society's ideal view of a human being: "Our conception of the goal
has become secularised; consequently the means employed themselves must
change."4





Otherwise, the system would be teaching values inconsistent with
society, possibly leading to its own demise. "What point is there,"
Durkheim asks, "in imagining a kind of education that would be fatal for
the society that put it into practice?"5















------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Group Values
==================



Yet, various social groups or strata may have different beliefs. The
parts of the educational system that are geared toward a particular
group will reflect that social group's values more than those of the
other groups. The ideals common to all the groups, however, will most
strongly be reflected because, Durkheim believes, "society can survive
only if there exists among its members a sufficient degree of
homogeneity; education perpetuates and reinforces this homogeneity by
fixing in the mind of the child, from the beginning, the essential
similarities that social life demands."6





If the values of a society change in a subtle manner, they may become
manifest in the educational system in a more readily perceptible manner.
For instance, if the norms of a society shift toward placing a greater
emphasis on merit, the educational system may reflect the change by
instituting a system of examinations to determine a student's place in
the social organization of society. Similarly, obvious changes in
society's values, on the other hand, may become manifest in the
education system only in subtle ways.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Changes over Time
=======================



The major changes that occur over time tend to leave an imprint on the
educational system. If, for example, during a certain era, society had
made social status contingent upon birthright, the educational system
would likely reflect this, perhaps by admitting only those from the
higher social levels into the prestigious educational institutions.
Later, society may come to value merit, with each person gaining access
to the higher-level or prestigious institutions through examination
rather than birthright. Yet the imprint, the residue, of the
aristocratic system is likely to still exist in the educational system
in some subordinate manner or marginal form. Perhaps there was, for
example, a useful aspect of the old system that has been retained by the
new.





Systematically tracing the imprints left by such changes in the
educational system reveal underlying shift's in society's organization
and values. Indeed, Durkheim would say, the aspects of the old
educational system retained by the new one are those that are still
representative of society's values, although perhaps only marginally.
The past has contributed, as Durkheim points out, to the formation of
the principles that guide education. The principles that guide
education, in turn, reflect the values of society. Thus, Durkheim
believed, "studying the history of education, relating educational
change to wider cultural, social and economic changes, would enable one
to \`anticipate the future and understand the present.'"7















------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 The Influence of Teachers
===============================



There are also specific means through which the educational system
reflects underlying changes in society. One of the these is through the
work of the system's teachers, who are representatives in the schools of
the greater culture and who would thus embody its transformations and
pass them on. "Teaching," Durkheim writes, "is merely a shortened
version of the intellectual culture of the adult."8 Teachers inculcate
the ideals and knowledge of society in their students. Thus, changes in
both the method and content of teaching necessarily embody many
important and substantial changes in the greater culture.





The church also led educational systems to reflect changes in society,
for the church served as a channel through which societal change became
manifested in the schools. The educational system, in turn, also
significantly reflected the role of the church in society.















------------------------------------------------------------------------

6 Modernization and Malaise
===============================



Yet while Durkheim was interested in the ways institutional systems
embody and reflect the values of society, he was also concerned with how
such systems as education could foster a society better suited to deal
with the changes wrought by modernization and industrialization. For
Durkheim, it's not enough to merely identify society's past and present
values, but to discover those values that best coincide with the
conditions of society. Durkheim thus gives his analysis of society a
normative feature.





Thus, as with many other aspects of Durkheim's sociology, his approach
to analyzing educational systems was both empirical and prescriptive.
Many of a system's existing values would have been handed down by
history or dictated by such formerly powerful institutions as the
church. In France, Durkheim analyzed whether such values were
appropriate for a France being changed by modernization. Durkheim sought
to clarify them and to investigate their compatibility to the kind of
society that was unfolding in France as a new century loomed.





More specifically, Durkheim felt that many of the values inherited from
the past had begun to lose their appeal, and the result was a
dissolution of moral beliefs that led to malaise.9 The question for
Durkheim, then, was to identify a new set of moral beliefs that could
again bind society, allaying its malaise. What, Durkheim wanted to
discover, were the common beliefs required by a France in the throes of
modernization and industrialization? Once these ends were pinpointed,
education would be a vehicle through which they could be systematically
disseminated. Education, then, not only reflected changes in society,
but could also be used to impel society to change. Indeed, it was for
Durkheim one of the paths to the reintegration of society.





To conclude, in the ways noted above, Durkheim found education to
reflect underlying changes in society. As such, he used educational
systems as a window into society's organization and values, both past
and present. As Lukes puts it, Durkheim "made a systematic attempt to
identify broad historical continuities, interpreting them as evidence of
cultural trains or as answering fundamental social needs."10















------------------------------------------------------------------------

7 Notes
===========



1 Steve Lukes, Emile Durkheim: His Life and Work (New York: Harper &
Row, 1972), p. 12.





2 ibid. p. 12.





3 ibid. p. 12.





4 Emile Durkheim, Selected Writings, ed. and trans. Anthony Giddens
(Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1972), p. 208.





5 ibid. p. 204.





6 ibid. p. 203.





7 Emile Durkheim: His Life and Work, p. 380.





8 ibid. p. 205.





9 ibid. p. 354.





10 ibid. p. 386.




