---
author: Steve Hoenisch
description: |
    This essay reveals the central distinctive elements of Jurgen Habermas'
    theory of discourse ethics and how his moral theory differs from those
    of two other prominent philosophers, Immanuel Kant and John Rawls. 
keywords: |
    philosophy, discourse ethics, moral theory, Jurgen Habermas, ethics,
    John Rawls, Kant, Steve Hoenisch, analytic philosophy, the Frankfurt
    School
title: 'Habermas'' Theory of Discourse Ethics'
---


1 Introduction
==================



The purpose of this essay is to reveal the central distinctive
elements of Jürgen Habermas' theory of discourse ethics and how his
moral theory differs from those of two other prominent philosophers,
Immanuel Kant and John Rawls. In unveiling the distinctive qualities of
Habermas' discourse ethics, the fundamental difference between it and
Kant's moral theory, upon which Habermas in part bases his thought, will
be explained. Next, in exposing another distinctive element of discourse
ethics, a pivotal difference between Habermas' moral theory and John
Rawls' theory of justice will be elucidated.





Jürgen Habermas' theory of discourse ethics contains two distinctive
characteristics: (I) it puts forth as its fundamental tenet a
prerequisite of participation in argumentation for testing the validity
of a norm and (ii) it transforms the individual nature of Kant's
categorical imperative into a collective imperative by reformulating it
to ensure the expression of a general will and by elevating it to a rule
of argumentation. The proceduralism of the first characteristic sets
Habermas' discourse ethics apart from the moral theory of John Rawls.
The second characteristic differentiates it from Kantian moral theory
and, again, from Rawls' theory of justice.





Habermas' moral theory is grounded in the principle of discourse ethics,
which can be viewed as a principle of argumentation. It stipulates that
"only those norms can claim to be valid that meet (or could meet) with
the approval of all affected in their capacity as participants in a
practical discourse."1





This practical discourse, Habermas writes, is "a procedure for testing
the validity of hypothetical norms, not for producing justified norms."2
In this way Habermas' discourse ethics guarantees that the process of
making judgements is carried out impartially, in contrast to Rawls'
theory of justice, which seeks to make impartial the orientation of an
individual making a moral judgement. Unlike Rawls' (and Kant's) theory,
Habermas' principle of discourse ethics ensures that the universalist
principle can be interpreted only as expressing the normative content of
a procedure, not the normative content of the argument. Indeed, Habermas
makes it clear that his theory contains no hint of substantive moral
content.














2 The Universalization Principle
====================================



As the practical discourse on a norm unfolds, Habermas' universalization
principle, adapted from Kant's categorical imperative, guides the
argumentation of the participants while guarding its rationality. But
Habermas' universalization principle, though borrowed from Kant's moral
theory, differs from the categorical imperative in that it extends
Kant's tenet to explicitly include as participants all those affected by
a norm. Habermas' formulation of the universalization principle, which
is "intended to compel the universal exchange of roles,"3 precludes its
monological application. Kant's categorical imperative, on the other
hand, requires only a monological application by the individual
pondering the norm. Articulating his ethical system in Metaphysic of
Morals, published in 1785, Kant described his categorical imperative as
follows: "Act only according to a maxim by which you can at the same
time will that it shall become a general law." Kant's categorical
imperative permits an individual to ascribe as valid for everyone any
maxim that he would will to be a universal law. 

Habermas' theory
modifies Kant's categorical imperative to explicitly include all those
involved in or affected by a conflict. Habermas' principle of
universalization holds that "for a norm to be valid, the consequences
and side effects of its general observance for the satisfaction of each
person's particular interests must be acceptable to all."4 

Habermas'
principle reformulates the categorical imperative to necessitate that a
maxim must be submitted to everyone to test its claim to universality.
"The emphasis shifts from what each can will without contradiction to be
a general law, to what all can will in agreement to be a universal
norm."5 In this way Habermas transforms Kant's categorical imperative
from a maxim pertaining to the individual into one governing all
participants involved in the testing of norm. As such, the
universalization principle transcends its former role as an imperative
to become, in Habermas' words, a "procedure for argumentation."





It also, according to Habermas, attempts to draw the perspective of
real-life argumentation into the deliberation of a norm by admitting all
affected as participants. As such, Habermas' principle of
universalization differs, as Habermas himself points out, from the
principle Rawls proposes to ensure that an individual considers
impartially the interests of others in formulating a norm. Rawls places
the individual into an "original position" in which "differences of
power are eliminated, equal freedoms for all are guaranteed, and the
individual is left in a condition of ignorance with regard to the
position he might occupy in a future social order."6 Habermas' objection
to Rawls' formulation of a universalization principle is the same as his
objection of Kant's categorical imperative: It allows the individual to
justify norms monologically, that is, without resorting to participatory
dialogue with the others who may be affected by the norm.










3 Conclusion
================



Thus, as has been shown, Habermas' theory of discourse ethics contains
two central distinctive elements -- the insistence on practical,
participatory discourse and a principle of universalization that guides
argumentation. Through these two elements, discourse ethics differs from
the moral theories of Rawls and Kant, even though Habermas borrows
extensively from the latter in formulating his theory. Indeed, Habermas
retains the strengths of Kant's moral theory while discarding its
weaknesses, forging a theory that rises above the traditional criticisms
leveled at Kant, such as his theory's monological nature, while
remaining grounded in a practical, pragmatic purpose -- using
communication to devise common solutions to normative problems.











4 Notes
===========



1 Jürgen Habermas, Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action,
translated by Christian Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1990, p. 197.





2 ibid. p. 122.





3 ibid. p. 65.





4 ibid. p. 197.





5 ibid. p. 67.





6 ibid. p. 66.



