---
description: 
    Max Weber questions why capitalism should have a more authoritarian
    nature in one state than another.
keywords:
    Max Weber, capitalism, sociology, political economy, political science,
    authoritarianism, modernism, modernization, economic development
title: 'Max Weber''s Interest in Studying Capitalism'
---




**A** key question for Max Weber, at least in his early works, was the
following:





Why should the same economic development that is capitalism have a more
authoritarian nature in one state than elsewhere. The only form of
modernization at the time, capitalism was interesting for Weber because
it was a universal economic trend proceeding under differing
circumstances, such as liberal and authoritarian, in different nations,
such as Britain and Germany. Why?





The question and its answer form a fundamental part of Weberian theory.





It's important to come to grips with how Weber accounted for why
capitalism had a more authoritarian nature in Germany and other places
in Central Europe than it did elsewhere, such as in the United States
and Britain.





In addition, Weber saw that Germany was becoming increasingly modern,
and that this modernity was forcing changes among the people. This led
him to become concerned with the nature of industrial society and the
humanity of the individual within it. Weber believed that the humanity
of the individual within modern industrial society was being
obliterated.





More: Weber was interested in not only the fate of humanity but also the
fate of humanity within the modern German Nation-State as it was being
transformed by political revolution and industrialization into a modern
nation. What, Weber might ask, is the future for the individual within
this emerging modern state?





What forms of political systems are the new modernized nations
compatible with -- democracy, authoritarianism, monarchy?





Weber's also concerned with the increasing bureaucratization of life.




